 
 
Hume, Induction, 
and 
Probability 
 
Peter J.R. Millican 
 
The University of Leeds 
Department of Philosophy 
 
 
Submitted in accordance with the requirements for the degree of PhD, May 1996.  The 
candidate confirms that the work submitted is his own and that appropriate 
credit has been given where reference has been made to the work of others. ii 
 iii 
 Abstract 
The overall aim of this thesis is to understand Hume’s famous argument concerning 
induction, and to appraise its success in establishing its conclusion.  The thesis accordingly falls into two main parts, the first being concerned with analysis and interpretation of the argument itself, and the second with investigation of possible responses to it.  Naturally the argument’s interpretation strongly constrains the range of possible replies, and indeed the results of Part I indicate that the only kind of strategy which stands much prospect of defeating Hume’s argument is one based on a priori  
probabilistic reasoning – hence the overwhelming majority of Part II is devoted to a thorough investigation of this approach. 
Leaving aside the many incidental discussions of others’ work, the principal novel 
ideas in Part I of the thesis concern:  (a) Clarification of Hume’s distinction between “demonstrative” and “probable” reasoning (§1.4);  (b) Identification of arbitrariness  as 
a key notion in the argument (§2.2);  (c) Substantiation of the argument’s normative significance (§2.4);  (d) Coherent interpretation of Humean “presupposition” (§2.5, §3.2);  (e) Elucidation of Hume’s conclusion and its lack of dependence on his analysis of causation (§§4.1-2);  (f) Construction of a complete structure diagram for the argument (§4.3);  (g) Refutation of Stove’s well-known alternative diagram (§5.1);  (h) Likewise of Stove’s analysis of Hume’s conclusion and his allegation of deductiv-ism (§5.2);  and finally (i) Exposition of a three-way ambiguity in Hume’s notion of “reason”, which both clarifies its context in relation to predecessors such as Locke, and iv 
 also explains how the argument can be genuinely sceptical while at the same time 
making sense of Hume’s unambiguously positive attitude towards science (§§6.1-2). 
The main discussion of Part II is prepared by (j) A demonstration of the impotence 
of the traditional non-probabilistic counters to Hume’s argument (§§7.2-5) and (k) A clarification of the available probabilistic perspectives from which a potential 
justification of induction could begin.  The principles of probability theory (based on 
Jeffreys’ system) are briefly presented, and the presuppositions for what follows set out.  Then the heart of Part II consists of four chapters providing a theoretical framework within which are situated and discussed attempted justifications by:  (l) De Finetti (§§10.3-4);  (m) Williams and Stove (§10.5);  (n) Mackie (§§11.2-6);  and (n) Harrod and Blackburn (§§12.1-7).  All of these fail, but reflection on the “continuing uniformity” strategy of Mackie combined with the scale-invariance hinted at by Harrod surprisingly suggests:  (o) A new method of argument based on Jaynes’ solution to the “paradoxes of geometrical probability” (§§13.4-6), which appears to represent the “last best hope” of the probabilistic approach to justifying induction.  The thesis ends by asking whether the derivation of this method should be considered as an anti-Humean modus ponens  or on the contrary as a sceptical modus tollens .  The issues involved here 
enter formal terrain beyond the scope of the thesis, but nevertheless there are clear indications that the presuppositions of the new argument are themselves insecure and subject to Humean doubt.  On the whole, then, and despite a small ray of hope for the inductive probabilist, Hume appears to be vindicated. 
____________________ v 
 Contents 
Preface ix 
Acknowledgements xiii 
PART I  HUME’S ARGUMENT CONCERNING INDUCTION: 
STRUCTURE AND INTERPRETATION 1 
Chapter 1   The Context and Topic of Hume’s Argument 3 
1.1 Introduction 3 
1.2 The Treatise  and the Enquiry  6 
1.3 The Topic of the Argument 10 1.4 “Demonstrative” and “Probable” 14 
Chapter 2   Probable Arguments and the Uniformity Principle 19 
2.1 The Overall Strategy of Hume’s Argument 19 2.2 “All Probable Arguments are Founded on Experien ce” 20 
2.3 “All Probable Arguments Presuppose that Nature is Uniform” 27 2.4 “Foundation in the Understanding” and “Rational Justification” 30 2.5 The Uniformity Principle and its Presupposition 35 
Chapter 3   Seeking a Foundation for the Uniformity Principle 45 
3.1 “The Uniformity Principle can only be Justified by Argument” 45 3.2 “There is No Good Argument for the Uniformity Principle” 47 
Chapter 4   The Conclusion of Hume’s Argument, and a Coda 55 
4.1 Hume’s Conclusion: “Probable Inferences are Not Founded on Reason” 55 
4.2 Coda: the Irrelevance of Causal Powers, and a Parting Shot 57 4.3 The Complete Structure of Hume’s Argument 64 vi 
 Chapter 5   Stove’s Analysis and his Interpretation of Hume’s Conclusion 69 
5.1 Stove’s Structural Analysis and Hume’s Alleged Deductivism 69 
5.2 Stove’s Probabilistic Interpretation of Hume’s Conclusion 75 
Chapter 6   Hume, Scepticism, and Reason 81 
6.1 Is Hume an Inductive Sceptic? 81 
6.2 Three Senses of “Reason” 86 
6.3 “Reason” in the Argument Concerning Induction 95 
PART II  PROBABILISTIC REASONING AS AN ANSWER TO HUME101 
Chapter 7   Introduction: Strategies for Refuting Hume 103 
7.1 The Shape of Part II 103 
7.2 The Inductive Justification 105 7.3 The Analytic Justification 107 7.4 The Pragmatic Justification 109 
7.5 The Impotence of the Non-Probab ilistic Attempts at  Justification 112 
7.6 Conclusion:  Pr obability or  Bust! 115 
Chapter 8  Probability Theory (a)  Interpretations and Options 117 
8.1 Four Interpretations of Probability 117 
8.2 Clarifying the Options 120 8.3 Conceivable Probabilistic Perspectives for the Justification of Induction 127 
Chapter 9  Probability Theory (b) Basic Principles 129 
9.1 Introduction:  Fundamental Principles from Two Bayesian Perspectives 129 
9.2 A Summary of Jeffreys’ Axiom System 130 9.3 The Basis of Personalism 139 9.4 Bayes’ Theorem 141 9.5 Prior Probabilities and Indifference 143 vii 
 Chapter 10   Seeking the Individual Probability of Future Events 147 
10.1 Introduction:  Future Events versus Continuing Uniformity 147 
10.1 Bernoullian Trials and the Law of Large Numbers 148 10.2 An Inverse Law of Large Numbers? 151 10.3 De Finetti’s Theorem on Exchangeable Events 154 10.4 What Has De Finetti Proved? 159 
10.5 Williams and Stove 165 
10.6 A Humean Punch Line: Why These Attempts Must Fail 169 
Chapter 11   Continuing Uniformity (a) Mackie 171 
11.1 The Probability of  Continuing Uniformity: Introduction 171 
11.2 A Criterion of Success 174 11.3 Mackie’s Defence of Induction 176 
11.4 The Mathematics of Mackie’s Argument 178 
11.5 Satisfying the Criterion 181 11.6 The Incompleteness of Mackie’s Argument 182 
Chapter 12   Continuing Uniformity (b) Harrod and Blackburn 185 
12.1 Harrod’s Initial Argument, and an Objection 185 
12.2 Harrod’s Revised “Square Array” Argument 190 
12.3 Blackburn’s Discussion of Harrod’s Argument 195 
12.4 Two Decisive Objections to Harrod’s Argument 202 12.5 A Further Objection to Blackburn 205 12.6 Scale Invariance and Infinities 207 12.7 Conclusion 210 viii 
 Chapter 13   Continuing Uniformity (c)  An Objective Prior? 211 
13.1 Introduction:  The Need for an “Objective Prior” 211 
13.2 Finite and Infinite Applications of the Principle of Indifference 212 13.3 The Paradoxes of Ge ometrical Probability 214 
13.4  Indifference Amongst Problems: Jaynes’ Answer to Bertrand’s Paradox 220 13.5 Deriving an “Objective” Prior for the Extent of Temporal Uniformity 223 
13.6 The Log Uniform Distribution 227 
13.7 An Inductively Favourable Conclusion? 230 
PART III  CONCLUSION 233 
Chapter 14  Induction Defended or Hume Victorious? 235 
Modus Ponens , or Modus Tollens ? 235 
APPENDICES 239 
APPENDIX 1: An authoritative text of Section IV of Hume’s First Enquiry  241 
APPENDIX 2: Structure diagrams of the Treatise  and Enquiry  arguments, 
with Hume’s statement of their stages 257 
APPENDIX 3: A Proof of Chebyshev’s Inequality 267 
REFERENCES 271 
(a)  Works Cited in Part I 272 
(b)  Works Cited in Parts II and III 274 
INDEXES 281 ix 
 Preface 
This thesis falls into two main parts.  In the first, I have attempted to provide a 
detailed and thorough analysis of Hume’s famous argument concerning induction, focusing in particular on the presentation of that argument in Section IV of his Enquiry 
Concerning Human Understanding  (though Appendix 2 provides a corresponding 
outline analysis of the argument from Section I iii 6 of the Treatise of Human Nature ).  
In the second part, I look at possible responses to Hume’s argument so interpreted, and in particular, examine the question of whether a consideration of mathematical probability theory could in principle yield an answer to it, by providing a route through the one major logical gap that Hume’s discussion leaves unclosed. 
My keen interest in Hume goes back to my undergraduate days at Oxford, where I 
found his clear no-nonsense style a breath of fresh air after an initially exciting but ultimately disillusioning flirtation with Kant.  Hume’s incisive and penetrating arguments, particularly on the subjects of causal and religious knowledge, were in many respects a liberation, cutting a commonsense swathe through a jungle of wish-fulfilling natural theology and obscurantist a priori  metaphysics.  However these same 
arguments seemed to leave in their wake an unsettling epistemological instability:  their sceptical thrust did not strike merely at the ambitious sophistry attacked so wittily in the Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion , but also threatened to undermine the very 
foundations of the solidly empirical science that Hume had sought to put in its place. x 
 This concern became heightened when as a B.Phil. postgraduate, and eventually a 
lecturer in Leeds, I taught the Enquiry  to undergraduates – the traditional Oxford way 
had been to treat Hume’s philosophy as a sequence of more or less independent “topics”, and typically to ignore those not represented also in the Treatise ; whereas I 
firmly believed in the importance of appreciating the overall structure of a 
philosopher’s thought, and felt sure that Hume’s strong post- Treatise  emphasis on the 
contrast in legitimacy between empirical science and natural theology was a crucially significant factor in his world-view.  In this context, therefore, the major problem was in making sense of his notorious argument concerning induction, which seemed on the standard interpretation to be equally destructive of both. 
Meanwhile my teaching had also motivated me to start putting together a 
collection of accessible papers on the topics of the Enquiry , but despite a 
comprehensive trawl through the literature, including several days spent buried in the Bodleian libraries, and despite the universally acknowledged centrality of the issue, I could find absolutely nothing on Hume on induction (either the Treatise  or the 
Enquiry ) that impressed me as giving a thorough, reliable and balanced treatment.  The 
only authors whose interpretation of Hume’s argument seemed at all persuasive were those who had merely examined a part of it, or sketched it from a distance, while those (such as Stove, and Beauchamp et al ) who had attempted a more comprehensive 
analysis appeared to be able to make sense of it only by concentrating on one aspect of Hume’s position to the exclusion of everything else.  It was in the effort to sort out this muddle, and to understand the argument for myself, that I began the work that led through various intermediate stages to the long paper “Hume’s Argument Concerning xi 
 Induction: Structure and Interpretation” (Millican 1995), which formed the basis for 
most of Part I of this thesis.  Here I have tried not only to present my own interpretation of Hume’s argument, but also to explain the objections to each of the significant rival interpretations of which I am aware.  Given the context of its initial publication as an article, however, many of these responses to other writers had to be 
condensed into terse footnotes, which though arguably less appropriate in a thesis, have 
here been left in that form for the sake of preserving the focus and flow of the main discussion, which might otherwise have become excessively convoluted. 
In explaining the background to Part II of this thesis I must acknowledge an 
important second line of influence, and an intellectual debt.  Soon after starting on the B.Phil., I asked John Mackie to become my supervisor even though the topic of my thesis, in Philosophical Logic, was by no means amongst his central concerns.  The breadth of his interests and his straightforward style impressed me greatly, and over the year before his early death I had the benefit of stimulating supervisions that sometimes ranged over Logic, Epistemology, Ethics and Theism all in a single session.  Given my mathematical background and our common interest in Hume and the demarcation of legitimate empirical reasoning, it is not surprising that I soon became interested in his probabilistic defence of induction (Mackie 1979), which I set out independently to analyse.  Despite my concluding that his argument failed (the details are given in Chapter 11), he generously encouraged me to send the discussion to Analysis , and this 
resulted in my first ever publication (Millican 1982).  Since that time I have naturally retained a keen interest in probabilistic attempts to refute Hume, and in the second part of this thesis have tried to pull together my various strands of thought and to placexii 
 them within a unified framework.  This framework is not by any means comprehensive 
– for example I have made no attempt to provide any deep analysis of the various competing theories of probability, or to examine the many developments in the Carnapian tradition of inductive logic.  Instead, bearing in mind the context and purpose of the thesis, I have dealt with issues only in so far as they have seemed 
relevant to probabilistic attempts to refute Hume, and in particular to those attempts 
that have hitherto themselves gone unrefuted.  Unlike Part I, most of which has been published previously and discussed over the years by numerous colleagues (notably at two Hume Society Conferences), Part II is nearly all relatively untested and accordingly somewhat more speculative.  In attempting to provide a systematic treatment of the various probabilistic methods of addressing Hume’s argument, it is also I believe more novel.  Realistically, therefore, it should probably be seen not as an attempt to conclude a debate, but rather to bring some order and focus to one that has hitherto been largely piecemeal and unsystematic.  If it has succeeded at least in this more modest task, then I shall be more than satisfied. 
Although it may, perhaps, be unconventional in the case of a doctoral dissertation 
as opposed to a book, I would like to dedicate this thesis, with love and admiration, to my wife Pauline for her companionship, understanding and support over what has been an extremely busy, and in some ways extremely stressful, period for both of us. 
 
Peter Millican xiii 
 Acknowledgements 
I am extremely grateful to the Department of Philosophy and the School of 
Computer Studies at the University of Leeds for generously granting me study leave to complete this work.  Without the freedom from teaching duties provided by that leave, finishing this thesis would have been far more difficult and my self-education in probability and statistics, in particular, would have either taken a great deal longer or b e en  rel a ti v el y  s u p e rf i ci al .  I am  al s o v e ry  g ra te f ul  to  P r of e s s or D a v i d  H ol d c rof t f or encouraging me in the project and acting as my supervisor, and to all of my colleagues in the Philosophy Department who contributed to providing such a pleasant and stimulating environment for philosophical study and conversation. 
Many people from other universities have also given helpful comments on 
previous incarnations of the first half of this work, notably at the Lancaster and Utah Hume Society Conferences, and at talks that I have given to the British Society for the Philosophy of Science and at a fair number of Philosophy Departments from Dundee and Glasgow in the north, to Kent and Sussex in the south.  I have also benefited from independent conversations in other contexts with numerous individuals – apart from those mentioned elsewhere in the Acknowledgements, these include Michael Ayers, Simon Blackburn, George Botterill, Justin Broackes, Paul Castell, Edward Craig, Antony Hatzimoysis, Christopher Hookway, Peter Milne, and Galen Strawson, and I apologise to anyone that I may have overlooked.  However I trust that all my specific intellectual debts have been properly acknowledged in the thesis itself. xiv 
 I am especially grateful to those who have taken the trouble to give detailed 
comments on aspects of my work (Hume Society members all):  Tom Beauchamp, Martin Bell, Don Garrett, David Norton, David Owen, Wade Robison, and Sandy Stewart.  I would also like to thank those who have sent me copies of their own work, and in particular Don Garrett, who generously gave me a computer disk of his 
forthcoming book, currently in press with Oxford and in my view destined to be a 
major contribution to Hume scholarship, which has enabled me recently to add an entire section (§2.4) on a central issue that has elsewhere been little discussed. 
Regarding the technical work in Part II, I am very grateful to Professor John Kent 
of the Department of Statistics in Leeds for guidance on reading and for a number of conversations which I hope helped to keep me on the mathematical strait and narrow. 
Any work like this depends upon access to a good library, and I consider myself 
very fortunate to have been able to take advantage of the British Library Lending Division, the National Library of Scotland, and especially the Brotherton and Edward Boyle libraries at Leeds University (including the Brotherton Special Collections).  I am indebted to the Leeds librarians for agreeing to double my already generous borrowing limit, and for coping with the regular coming and going of book mountains that this brought in its wake.  Particular thanks are also due here to Richard Davies. 
I would like to end by expressing gratitude to my family for their moral support, 
including my mother and my late father who first introduced me to philosophical thinking.  My children David, Katie and Jonathan have been a constant source of happy distraction, but my principal debt is expressed in the dedication to my wife Pauline. 1 
 PART I 
 
Hume’s Argument Concerning 
Induction: 
Structure and Interpretation 2 
 3 
 Chapter 1   The Context and Topic of 
Hume’s Argument 
1.1 Introduction 
Hume’s argument concerning induction is the foundation stone of his philosophical 
system, and one of the most celebrated and influential arguments in the entire literature of western philosophy.  It is therefore rather surprising that the enormous attention which has been devoted to it over the years has not resulted in any general consensus as to how it should be interpreted, or, in consequence, how Hume himself should be seen.  At one extreme is the traditional view, which takes the argument to be thoroughly sceptical, leading to the sweeping conclusion that all “probable reasoning” or “reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence” is utterly worthless, so that Hume is portrayed as a negative Pyrrhonian intent on undermining the credentials of all our would-be knowledge of the world.  But at the other extreme a number of very prominent commentators, particularly in recent years, have put forward a strikingly contrasting view, that Hume’s intentions here are entirely non-sceptical, and that so far from advancing a negative thesis himself, he is merely intent on showing the implausible consequences of the “rationalist” position taken by some of his philosophical opponents. 4 
 Different conceptions of what Hume is aiming to achieve in his famous argument 
have, understandably, been associated with different views about its structure, its validity, and the nature and acceptability of its premises.  Thus for example those who have interpreted it as only a reductio ad absurdum  of a certain variety of extreme 
“rationalism” have usually been relatively happy to accept its apparently reasonable 
conclusion, whereas most of those who have followed the traditional line have 
considered Hume’s conclusion to be wildly paradoxical, and have accordingly sought to find fault either with the argument’s supposed premises or with its reasoning.  Allegedly faulty premises have included some which are explicit (e.g. that there are only two types of argument, “demonstrative” and “probable”), and others which are claimed to be implicit (e.g. Hume’s analysis of causation or even his entire “atomistic” epistemology).  But the most common and serious accusation against the argument has been that Hume, in Flew’s words (1961 p. 82), “presupposes an exclusively deductive ideal of reason”, which allegedly leads him to judge any argument as worthless unless it is deductively valid, and hence to draw sceptical conclusions about induction far beyond anything which his premises would justify.  This claim, that Hume is a “deductivist”, has been particularly associated with David Stove, whose analysis of Hume’s argument has been more influential and more widely discussed than that of any other recent commentator.
1  Stove has vigorously attacked Hume many times, most 
  
                                                
1 Amongst many who accept Stove’s interpretation more or less uncritically are Mackie (1974) 
pp. 9, 15 and Penelhum (1975) pp. 50-53.  The excellent bibliography Hall (1978) says that “On the 5 
 notably in his 1965 article “Hume, Probability, and Induction” and his 1973 book 
Probability and Hume’s Inductive Scepticism .  Here and elsewhere Stove has argued 
that what he identifies as Hume’s deductivism is not only an error but a pernicious canker which continues to infect much contemporary philosophical thought, especially in the philosophy of science, where he sees Hume’s deductivist legacy as the primary 
inspiration for the massively influential but dangerously misguided “irrationalist” 
tradition of Popper, Kuhn, Lakatos, and Feyerabend.
2 
This first part of the thesis will attempt to show that Hume’s argument on the one 
hand falls far short of the all-encompassing deductivist scepticism of which he has been so vehemently accused, and has no such disastrous implications for the rationality of science, while on the other hand being significantly more than a mere reductio  of 
extreme rationalism.  It will also maintain that the argument is far better than most of its critics such as Stove suppose, and that many of the most popular objections to it arise from crude oversimplifications, anachronistic misinterpretations, or simply a failure to read Hume’s texts carefully and sympathetically.  The interpretation presented here is intended to be based squarely on those texts, and on the logic of the reasonings which they contain.  And so a major part of our task will be to spell out 
                                                                                                                                        
 
specific subject of Hume’s argument for scepticism about induction, Stove’s monograph is 
indispensable” (p. 2). 
2 Stove (1970) contains a slightly modified version of the analysis that he first gave in “Hume, 
Probability and Induction”, and this is further expanded in Probability and Hume’s Inductive Scepticism .  
Both that book and Stove (1986) attempt, unsu ccessfully in my view, to provide a probab ilistic refutation 
of Hume, while Stove (1982) is his most sustained attack on Popper et alia . 6 
 clearly and explicitly the arguments which Hume uses to establish his position, with far 
closer attention to his own words than has customarily been given.3  As we proceed, we 
shall see that this precision brings considerable benefits, since it will enable us to dismiss on local textual grounds alone a variety of rival interpretations.  And once we have established a reliable overall picture of the structure of Hume’s argument, we 
shall then be able to deploy this to dismiss yet more misinterpretations of his position.  
Before embarking on this detailed interpretation of Hume’s argument, however, we must first make a choice between the three different versions of it which his writings contain. 
1.2 The Treatise  and the Enquiry  
Hume’s argument concerning induction was first presented in his Treatise of Human 
Nature  (1739), where it occupies most of Book I, Part iii, Section 6, entitled “Of the 
      
                                                
3 It has become almost standard for commentators on Hume’s argument to criticise their 
predecessors, usually with justification, for paying insufficient attention to his texts.  But even those who 
have made such criticisms most forcibly have typically themselves discussed the argument only in the most general terms, or by means of highly selective quotation, and have failed to show convincingly how their account corresponds to the actual content of Hume’s writings.  In what follows, I have therefore sought to avoid this danger by providing a thoroughly explicit and detailed analysis, giving in passing a clear interpretation of every individual paragraph which occurs in Hume’s most extensive presentation.  In view of the long-running controversy which has surrounded even the identification, let alone the assessment, of Hume’s most famous argument, I hope that this careful attention to the texts will be 
welcomed for its accuracy rather than regretted for its relative lack of speculative excitement. 7 
 Inference from the Impression to the Idea” (T86-92).  An extended summary of the 
argument (which apparently considers it “The CHIEF ARGUMENT ” of the Treatise  – 
A651) appeared the following year in his anonymously published Abstract  (A649-52), 
but by far its fullest and, in my view, clearest statement is in the Enquiry Concerning 
Human Understanding  (1748), where it appears as Section IV, “Sceptical Doubts 
Concerning the Operations of the Understanding” (E25-39).4  Here we shall focus 
mainly on the Enquiry  version of the argument, though reference will also be made to 
the earlier works, particularly where this helps to clarify the significance of Hume’s terms and his general philosophical position.  But although it is surely natural thus to take Hume’s final and most complete statement of the argument as authoritative, the majority of previous commentators have surprisingly concentrated instead on the version in the Treatise  (and som e even on that in the Abstract ).
5  It may therefore be 
worth briefly outlining my other reasons for preferring the Enquiry . 
To start with historical considerations, there is the fact that the Enquiry  not only 
appeared nearly a decade after the Treatise , but was subject to a number of revisions 
between 1750 (the second edition) and 1777 (the first posthumous edition, which 
                                                
4 Hume (1739), (1740) and (1777).  In what follows I shall refer to these as simply Treatise , 
Abstract , and Enquiry  respectively, and use the letters “T”, “A”, and “E” to signify page references to 
these editions (similarly using “ME” for Hume’s Moral Enquiry , and “D” for his Dialogues Concerning 
Natural Religion ). 
5 Those who have focused mainly on the Treatise  include Arnold, Baier, Broughton, Fogelin and 
Stroud, whereas Beauchamp et al, Flew and Jacobson have instead concentrated more on the Enquiry .  
Stove follows the Abstract  version, stating somewhat implausibly (and without explanation) that it is 
“the best in every respect” (1965 p. 192). 8 
 included Hume’s last corrections – see Appendix 1 below).  By contrast, and to his 
frustration, Hume had no opportunity for a revised edition of the Treatise  owing to its 
meagre sales.  In addition, we have Hume’s own request, expressed in the “Advertisement” which he wrote in 1775 for the volume containing the Enquiries , 
which states that the Treatise  is a “juvenile work” and that “Henceforth, the Author 
desires, that the following Pieces may alone be regarded as containing his 
philosophical sentiments and principles”.
6  This request has not been taken very 
seriously by Hume’s critics, who have tended to regard the Enquiry  as merely a 
watered down and popularised version of the unsuccessful Treatise .  But as we shall 
see there are good philosophical reasons for respecting Hume’s judgement here, at least as regards the presentation of his argument concerning induction. 
Perhaps the most fundamental of these is that the argument in I iii 6 of the 
Treatise  is much less free-standing than that in the Enquiry , since it is deeply 
embedded in the context of Hume’s investigation into our ideas of the seven “philosophical relations”, and in particular, his search for the origin of the idea of causation (which extends from I iii 2 to I iii 14).  In the Enquiry , by contrast, this 
search is postponed until long after the argument concerning induction, which is introduced not in relation to the idea of causation, but rather as a response to the              
                                               
 
6 The Advertisement  is reproduced on page 2 of Hume (1777).  On 26th October 1775 Hume wrote 
to his printer William Strahan, asking that it should be prefixed to all remaining copies of the second volume of his Essays and Treatises , the volume which contained both of the Enquiries,  the Dissertation 
on the Passions  and the Natural History of Religion  (Hume 1932 Volume II p. 301). 9 
 fundamental logical distinction between “relations of ideas” and “matters of fact” 
(E25) and a naturally arising epistemological question: “what is the nature of that evidence, which assures us of any ... matter of fact, beyond the present testimony of our senses, or the records of our memory” (E26).  It is true that both versions of the argument begin with a discussion of causation, but in the Enquiry  this is brought in not 
as a subject of (quasi-psychological) study in its own right, but just because it is the 
only relation which can take us beyond the evidence of our memory and senses (E26).  The difference of orientation is clearly reflected in the language of the two presentations: the Treatise  often talks in psychological terms (involving “impressions”, 
“ideas” and mental processes), whereas the argument of the Enquiry  is relatively 
independent of psychological considerations (and accordingly speaks more of “propositions” and their logical relations such as entailment and consistency).  But it also affects their structure: the Treatise  argument is more convoluted than it need be 
because it begins as an argument specifically about our mechanisms of causal inference, and only mentions “probable reasoning” in general when discussing the justification of what is commonly called his “Uniformity Principle”, at which point it appeals to Hume’s thesis that all probable reasoning is causal.
7  The Enquiry  argument, 
on the other hand, starts out as an investigation into the foundation of probable 
                                                
7 See the two Treatise  structure diagrams in Appendix 2, noting in particular the subtle distinction 
between propositions (8a) and (8), the former of which (concerning causal inferences “from the impression to the idea”) acts as the argument’s main pivot, while the latter (concerning “probable” reasoning) is inferred from (8a) together with (1a) and (1), and is invoked only for the purpose of deriving (16) as a means of proving that the Uniformity Principle cannot be supported by probable 
reasoning. 10 
 reasoning, and therefore introduces this thesis immediately, after which the remainder 
of the argument can be more streamlined and better focused, since no mention need then be made of specifically causal reasoning as such.  There are in addition certain other respects in which the argument of the Enquiry  is smoother than that of the 
Treatise : its structure is more explicit; it spells out a number of important stages which 
in the Treatise  are omitted; and its appeal to the Uniformity Principle is less 
misleading.  All of these points will be illustrated in what follows. 
1.3 The Topic of the Argument 
The argument in the Enquiry  starts from the famous distinction known as “Hume’s 
Fork” (a nickname first coined, I believe, by Flew 1961, p. 53): 
 All the objects of human reason or enquiry may naturally be divided into two kinds, to wit, 
Relations of Ideas , and Matters of Fact .  Of the first kind are the sciences of Geometry, Algebra, 
and Arithmetic; and in short, every affirmation, which is either intuitively or demonstratively 
certain. ... Propositions of this kind are discover able by the mere opera tion of tho ught, without 
dependence on what is any where existent in the universe. ... 
 Matters of fact ... are not ascertained in the same manner; nor is our evidence of their truth ... 
of a like nature with the foregoing.  The contrary of every matter of fact is still possible; because it can never imply a contradiction ... We should in vain, therefore, attempt to demonstrate its 
falsehood. ... 11 
  It may, therefore, be a subject worthy of curiosity, to enquire what is the nature of that 
evidence, which assures us of any real existence and matter of fact, beyond the present testimony of 
our senses, or the records of our memory. (E25-6) 
The point of Hume’s investigation, then, is to examine the foundation of all our beliefs 
about “absent” matters of fact, that is, matters of fact which are not immediately “present” to our senses or memory (he sometimes speaks simply of “matters of fact”, but clearly means to refer only to those which are absent  despite his omission of the 
explicit restriction).
8  Hume will argue that such beliefs are founded on inferences from 
things which we have observed to those which we have not, these inferences operating on the assumption that the latter will resemble the former.  Such inferences, which Hume himself refers to using phrases such as “probable arguments”, “moral reasonings”, or “reasonings concerning matter of fact [and existence]”, are now commonly known as “inductive” inferences, and hence Hume’s argument is generally referred to as his argument concerning induction . 
There is a potential source of confusion here, because the term “induction” has a 
rather different traditional Aristotelian sense, according to which it denotes not reasoning from observed to unobserved, but rather reasoning from particular cases to 
                                               
 
8 It has sometimes been suggested (cf. Bennett 1971, p. 245) that Hume counts something as a 
“matter of fact” only if it is “absent”.  But this seems too strong a conclusion to draw from Hume’s admittedly sometimes careless omission of the restriction (e.g. T92, E75), given that such a usage would make its common inclusion (e.g. E26, 45, 159) pleonastic; would not conform to his principal criterion for “matter of factness” (conceivability of the contrary); and would conflict outright with some of his explicit uses of the phrase (e.g. T143: “any matter of fact we remember”,  T469: “Here is a matter of 
fact; but ’tis the object of feeling, not of reason.”). 12 
 general principles or from effects to causes (with “deduction”, correspondingly, 
denoting reasoning from general to particular or from causes to effects).  Moreover the word continues to retain some of this connotation, and perhaps for this reason various commentators on Hume, notably Antony Flew (but also more excusably many writers of introductory books on the philosophy of science), have presented his argument about 
“induction” as primarily focused on inductive inferences to universal  conclusions, that 
is, inferences of the form “All observed A’s have been B’s, therefore all A’s whatever 
are B’s”.  It should, however, be clear from the extended quotation above that Hume’s 
concern is with all inferences from observed to unobserved, including singular 
inferences of the form “All observed A’s have been B’s, therefore this A (of which I 
now have an impression) is a B”.  In the Treatise , indeed, such inferences about 
particulars are taken as the paradigm, as indicated by the title of the section in which the famous argument occurs: “Of the inference from the impression to the idea”.  And in the Enquiry , too, most of the examples which Hume gives are of singular inferences.  
We should avoid, therefore, drawing any conclusions about Hume’s intentions from the historical accident that the topic of his famous argument is now generally referred to as “induction”.
9  For he himself never uses the term in this context, and anyway seems to 
understand it not in any technical sense but merely as a synonym for “inference” (T27, 628, ME170). 
                                               
 
9 Flew himself may have been misled in this way.  In his (1979) he defines induction as “A method 
of reasoning by which a general law or principle is inferred from observed particular instances” (p. 159), and in his (1961) pp. 71-2 and (1986) p. 53, he apparently interprets Hume’s argument as applying only 
to “inductive” arguments thus understood. 13 
 Although it seems best to avoid the anachronistic word “induction” when 
discussing Hume’s argument, we should also guard against being misled by his own terms (viz. “moral”, “probable”, “reasoning concerning matter of fact”) for the form of inference that he is investigating .  The word “moral”, for example, is now used almost exclusively to mean “ethical”, whereas when philosophers such as Hume and Berkeley 
(in Alciphron ) speak of “moral evidence”, their meaning is instead (to quote the Oxford 
English Dictionary ) “evidence which is merely probable and not demonstrative”.  But 
even this OED  definition is potentially misleading, because “probable” here has no 
mathematical connotation – Hume’s “probable reasoning” is not a matter of calculating odds but of extrapolating from observed to unobserved, and is so named not because it makes use of numerical probabilities, but simply because it is a posteriori  and less than 
certain, unlike “demonstrative” reasoning (and “intuition”, which Hume classes together with “demonstration” when drawing this contrast – e.g. E25).  In what follows phrases such as “probable reasoning” will be used exclusively in Hume’s now slightly archaic sense of “non-demonstrative (but nevertheless plausible) reasoning”, reserving the word “probabilistic” for reasoning of the mathematical kind, and thus providing us with a simple and unambiguous method of referring to the topic of his famous argument. 14 
 1.4 “Demonstrative” and “Probable” 
Where exactly the topic of Hume’s argument should be delimited, however, is still 
perhaps not quite clear, because his third characterisation of “inductive” reasoning, as that “concerning matter of fact [and existence]”, might appear to imply a distinction (between this type of reasoning and that which is “demonstrative”) somewhat different from that suggested by the related terms “moral” and “probable”.  Consider, for example, the following inference (contemplated by the present author in 1995 whilst writing this thesis): 
(I)  Hume’s First Enquiry  was published 247 years ago 
∴ In 3 years, it will be 250 years since the publication of Hume’s First Enquiry  
Does this count as “reasoning concerning matter of fact”?  It might at first seem to do 
so, for both its premise and its conclusion assert straightforward “matters of fact” (contingent propositions knowable only a posteriori ), and the inference moves from 
past to future, as is typical of inductive reasoning.  But on the other hand the argument (I) itself (as opposed to its premise or conclusion) is more than merely “moral” or “probable” – the conclusion follows from the premise with absolute deductive certainty, as sure as the arithmetical truth that 247 plus 3 equals 250.
10  The inference 
                                                
10 The certainty might not seem absolute, because the universe could end before 1998.  But to 
circumvent this complication, we can read the conclusion as a conditional (“If 3 years elapse, it will then be 250 years ...”).  Deductively valid arguments “concerning matter of fact” can of course be simpler if 
no reference is made to the future, for instance “This is an orange flame, therefore this is a flame” 15 
 also lacks another crucial feature which Hume takes fundamentally to characterise 
“probable” reasoning, a feature to which he appeals repeatedly both in his argument concerning induction and elsewhere: namely, that of being founded on the relation of cause and effect and hence on experience (he makes the explicit claim that all “reasonings concerning matter of fact” are so founded numerous times in the Enquiry , 
and not only in Section IV: see for example E42, 76, and 104).  Taking these points 
together I am sure that Hume, had he considered the matter, would have classed (I) as a “demonstrative” rather than as a “probable” argument (and would no doubt have recognised accordingly the infelicity of his expression “reasoning concerning matter of fact”).  For to have instead classed (I) as “probable” would have undermined not only his argument concerning induction but his entire theory of knowledge and belief. 
Despite the points just made, my claim that (I) should be classified on the 
“demonstrative” rather than the “probable” side of Hume’s distinction is controversial, because it has commonly been assumed to be definitive of Hume’s “demonstrative” reasoning that it should be entirely a priori  (Stove 1965 pp. 197-8 goes so far as to 
claim, very implausibly, that the distinction is strictly to be understood solely  in terms 
of the “epistemological character of [an argument’s] premises”, quite independently of the argument’s “degree of conclusiveness”).  However the only clear evidence given to support this assumption (Passmore 1952, p. 20; Stove 1973, p. 35) has been Hume’s comments regarding the limited province of “demonstration”, and these are far from 
                                                                                                                                        
 
(an example noticed by Stove 1973, p. 37, though he fails to follow through its implications for Hume’s 
distinction). 16 
 decisive.11  Stove gives five quotations (from A650, A651, E26, E35, and E163) which 
he interprets as stating “that there can be no demonstrative arguments for any conclusion concerning matter of fact”.  But this gloss does not correspond precisely to any of the five, for Hume’s actual words refer not to the possible conclusions of a “demonstrative argument”, but rather to those propositions that can, or cannot, be 
“demonstrated”, which is something quite different.  It is one thing to say, as Hume 
certainly does, that no “matter of fact” can be demonstrated, or proved demonstratively, or be the object of demonstration; it is quite another to say that a demonstrative argument cannot even be used to deduce one matter of fact from others.  Hume never makes this stronger claim, which is just as well since it seems to be inconsistent with at least two passages in Section IV of the Enquiry  alone (each of 
which we shall look at again in due course).  The first of these is the discussion of “mixed mathematics” at E31, which combines the assertion that physical laws are 
                                               
 
11 No evidence at all is presented by Beauchamp & Mappes (1975) p. 123, Beauchamp & 
Rosenberg (1981) p. 43, or Gaskin (1988) p. 77, while Stove (1965) pp. 197-8 just says that “no other 
interpretation can survive familiarity with the texts”, and invites the reader to check for himself “with the 
aid of Selby-Bigge’s analytical indexes” – this from an author who acknowledges that the question is “of fundamental importance” (1973, p. 36) and who castigates others for failing to begin “from a really close examination of Hume’s own words” (1965, p. 211)!  Two things actually revealed by a close examination of Hume’s texts are first, an alternative explanation for the limited province of demonstration (T70-71, E60-61, 163), which has nothing to do with a prioricity  but is instead based on 
the absence of precise relationships between non-mathematical ideas, and secondly, his penchant for argument by reductio ad absurdum , a form of reasoning that would obviously be quite impossible if 
demonstrative argument had always to start from a priori  true premises. 17 
 matters of fact with the observation that “abstract [demonstrative]12 reasonings are 
employed ... to determine their influence in particular instances”.  The second passage is at the heart of the argument concerning induction, where Hume discusses the inference from a past to a future conjunction of cause and effect: both conjunctions are clearly matters of fact, but this does not prevent his canvassing the possibility of a 
demonstrative argument from one to the other (E34, cf. also Hume’s contemplation of 
a would-be demonstrative causal inference at T161-2). 
Summing up, we have seen good grounds for interpreting Hume’s distinction 
between “demonstrative” and “probable” reasoning as that, roughly, between what we now call “deductive” and “inductive” reasoning, with the latter being understood in the broad sense which encompasses inference of singular facts as well as of general laws (for additional grounds, see the discussion of Locke in §2.5 below, note 23 in §3.1, and §6.1).  Initially in both the Treatise  and the Enquiry  Hume explicitly treats his two 
categories as exhaustive (though he later modifies this policy at T124 and E56n by dividing non-demonstrative reasoning into “proofs” and “probabilities”), and this simple dichotomy implies that the category of “probable” reasoning should theoretically include all non-deductive reasoning, or at least any that is worthy of the name.  But in practice Hume takes this category to include just one particular class of reasonings, and these form the topic of his famous argument.  Probable reasoning, thus 
                                               
 
12 The ancestor of this discussion in the Treatise  makes the same point and apparently equates 
“abstract” and “demonstrative”, in stating that “Abstract or demonstrative reasoning [sometimes] directs 
our judgement concerning causes and effects” (T414). 18 
 understood, is the kind of reasoning that we employ when we attempt to extend our 
knowledge by discovering new matters of fact which we have not directly perceived (so it is ampliative  unlike the merely analytical  (I)).  And according to Hume, as we 
shall see, such reasoning always relies on extrapolation from observed to unobserved, based on the assumption that the two will resemble. 19 
 Chapter 2   Probable  Arguments and the 
Uniformity Principle 
2.1 The Overall Strategy of Hume’s Argument 
Hume’s argument in Section IV of the Enquiry  can be thought of as falling into two 
halves, the first of which is devoted to proving that probable reasoning presupposes in some sense what I shall call the “Uniformity Principle”, and the second to showing that this Uniformity Principle has no foundation in reason.  From these two results, Hume draws his ultimate conclusion, that probable arguments are “not founded on reason, or any process of the understanding”.  Diagrammatically, we can represent this overall argument strategy, and its order of treatment in the next three chapters, as follows: 
 
 
CHAPTER 2    Probable arguments 
presuppose the Uniformity Principle 
 
 
CHAPTER 3    The Uniformity 
Principle has no foundation in reason   
 
CHAPTER 4    Probable 
arguments are not founded 
on reason or any process of 
the understanding 
 20 
 The present chapter will deal with the analysis and elucidation of the first half of 
Hume’s argument, in which he claims that probable arguments “are founded on” an assumption of uniformity.  Chapter 3 will then go on to consider the second half, in which he sets himself to undermine any pretensions that such an assumption might have to any basis in reason or the understanding.  Chapter 4 will consider the nature of 
Hume’s conclusion, and tie up some loose ends in his presentation of the argument. 
2.2 “All Probable Arguments are Founded on 
Experience” 
Part i of Section IV of the Enquiry  is devoted to establishing one fundamental result, 
that all probable arguments (“moral arguments”, “reasonings concerning matter of fact”) must, if they are to have any force, be based on experience.  So part of the answer to Hume’s original query: “what is the nature of that evidence, which assures us of any [absent] matter of fact” (E26) is that such evidence cannot be purely a priori . 
The essential structure of Hume’s argument for this result can be represented as 
follows, with the numbering of the propositions reflecting their textual (and/or logical) order, and the set of arrows to any particular proposition indicating the grounds given by Hume for inferring that proposition (whether or not these grounds are, in fact, adequate – the aim here is to represent the structure of Hume’s argument, not necessarily to endorse it). 21 
 (1)  Only the relation of 
cause and effect can take 
us beyond the evidence of 
our memory and senses 
 
  
(4)  Any effect is quite 
distinct from its cause, 
and many alternative 
effects are equally 
conceivable 
 
 
(3)  The sensible qualities 
of objects do not reveal 
either their causes or their 
effects   
  
(2)  All probable arguments 
(moral arguments, those 
concerning matter of fact) 
are founded on the relation 
of cause and effect 
 
  
(5)  Causal relations cannot 
be known a priori , but can 
only be discovered by 
experience (of constant 
conjunctions)   
       
(6)  All probable arguments 
(moral arguments, those 
concerning matter of fact) 
are founded on experience 
 
This “structure diagram” provides, of course, no more than an idealised outline, since 
Hume himself does not present his arguments as having any such explicit structure.  Indeed it is not easy in Part i to find even a straightforward statement of its conclusion, though proposition (6) is evidently implicit both in Hume’s argumentative procedure and in the summing-up which he gives in the first paragraph of Part ii (E32).
13  
Moreover his oft-repeated explicit statements of (2) and (5) are clearly intended to be read together, and Hume apparently sees (6) as such an obvious consequence of these that it does not even need to be stated, except perhaps in passing: “nor can our reason, 
                                               
 
13 For the summing up, see the beginning of §2.3 below.  Hume’s procedure of arguing for (6) via 
(2) and (5) is also made clear at E27: “If we would satisfy ourselves, therefore, concerning the nature of that evidence, which assures us of matters of fact, we must enquire how we arrive at the knowledge of 
cause and effect.” 22 
 unassisted by experience, ever draw any inference concerning real existence and matter 
of fact” (E27); “In vain, therefore, should we pretend to determine any single event ... without the assistance of observation and experience.” (E30). 
Hume’s argument from (1) to (2) is presented very briefly at E26: “All reasonings 
concerning matter of fact seem to be founded on the relation of Cause and Effect .  By 
means of that relation alone we can go beyond the evidence of our memory and 
senses.”  He then proceeds to give some illustrations to substantiate his claim that a “just inference from [facts about] one object to [facts about] another” (T89) can only be based on causation: this relation alone can provide the requisite “connexion between the present fact and that which is inferred from it”, without which any such inference “would be entirely precarious” (E27).
14 
                                                
14 Jacobson (1987) claims that this quoted passage from E27 is crucial to understanding Hume’s 
argument, which she takes to be founded primarily on the two premises that inferences about matter of fact are precarious unless they are mediated by strongly objective  connexions, and that such connexions 
cannot in fact be perceived (or legitimately inferred).  However it seems dubious to base so much on this passage, where Hume seems merely to be expanding on his familiar claim that only the relation of cause and effect can ground an inference to absent matters of fact, a claim made elsewhere (e.g. T73-4, 89) 
without any mention of connexions in this sense.  Her interpretation also seems dubious because such 
connexions (i.e. powers) make an appearance in the Treatise  version of Hume’s argument only in what I 
below call its “coda” (T90-1), where they are clearly introduced as an entirely new consideration which has hitherto played no part.  Even in the Enquiry  Hume’s talk of “connexions” is very non-committal, 
since both at E27 and at E29 (another passage on which Jacobson relies) he is in fact speaking very guardedly of “supposed” connexions.  Any residual temptation to interpret Hume’s arguments in Enquiry  IV as turning on a strongly objective notion of “connexion” should be removed by the 
significant footnote at E33n, which refers the reader to Section VII for a “more accurate explication” of 
“power”. 23 
 Having concluded that all probable reasoning is causal, Hume now sets himself to 
prove that all knowledge of causal relations is a posteriori : “I shall venture to affirm, as 
a general proposition, which admits of no exception, that the knowledge of this relation is not, in any instance, attained by reasonings à priori ; but arises entirely from 
experience” (E27).  The argument for this proposition, (5) in the structure diagram 
above, occupies the remainder of Part i.  Hume provides two lines of argument for it, 
the first of which is initially presented using a thought-experiment.  Suppose that Adam, just after his creation, and with no previous experience to call on, had been confronted with water and fire – simply from examining their “sensible [i.e. sensory] qualities”, Adam could not possibly have inferred what effects they would have.  This illustrates the general proposition (3): “No object ever discovers, by the qualities which appear to the senses, either the causes which produced it, or the effects which will arise from it” (E27).  Hume thinks that this proposition, and what he takes to be its immediate consequence (5), appear unsurprising “with regard to such objects, as we remember to have once been altogether unknown to us”, but when an object has been very familiar to us since our birth, “We are apt to imagine, that we could discover [its] effects by the mere operation of our reason, without experience.” (E28).
15 
                                                
15 When Hume denies that causal knowledge can be a priori , he seems to mean not only that it 
requires experience, but that it requires experience beyond mere perception  of the sensible qualities of 
the objects concerned.  The explanation of this may be that he here individuates kinds of object in terms of their sensible qualities, so that the appearance of any kind of object is already taken for granted when 
we enquire (even a priori ) into its causes or effects. 24 
 To show that this natural assumption is mistaken, Hume employs a second line of 
argument, summarised in the diagram as proposition (4), which starts with a characteristic challenge: “Were any object presented to us, and were we required to pronounce concerning the effect, which will result from it, without consulting past observation; after what manner, I beseech you, must the mind proceed in this 
operation?” (E29).  He then goes on to claim that the challenge cannot be met: that 
there is no way in which pure ( a priori ) reason alone can discover causal connexions.  
For any cause and its effect are logically quite distinct; a priori  there is nothing in the 
one to suggest the idea of the other; so that in advance of experience any imagined pairing between causes and effects will appear entirely arbitrary.  And even if by luck we happen to guess the correct pairing, so that we succeed in ascribing to some particular cause its actual future effect, nevertheless the conjunction of the two will still appear arbitrary from an a priori  point of view, “since there are always many other 
effects, which, to reason, must seem fully as consistent and natural.” (E30). 
It is very important to notice that this second line of argument is somewhat 
different from that with which Hume is commonly attributed, most notably by Stove:
16 
                                                
16 Stove (1973 p. 31, cf. Stove 1965 p. 194).  I have slightly adjusted Stove’s wording to conform 
to the Enquiry  presentation of Hume’s argument rather than to those in the Treatise  and Abstract (which 
speak of “inferring an idea from an impression” etc.). 25 
   (a) Whatever is intelligible, is possible. 
  (b) That the inference from some cause to some effect, prior to  experience of the 
appropriate constant conjunction, should have its premise true and conclusion false, is an inte lligible supposition. 
 Therefore (c) That supposition is possible.  And hence (d) The inference from cause to effect, prior to experience, is not one which 
reason engages us to make. 
For Hume, especially in the Enquiry ,17 is not stating merely that cause and effect are 
logically distinct – that the one is conceivable without the other – and concluding that for this reason alone there cannot be a legitimate inference from one to the other.  He is starting from a much stronger premise, namely, that a priori  there is no discernible 
connexion whatever  between cause and supposed effect: in advance of experience the 
conjunction of the two appears “entirely arbitrary”, and the supposed effect is therefore no more “consistent and natural” than any number of alternatives.  So Hume’s argument here need not rely, as Stove supposes, on the deductivist assumption that an inference from cause to effect is unreasonable unless the occurrence of the cause without the effect is logically inconceivable.  It requires only the far more
                                               
 
17 There is an interesting progression in Hume’s thought here.  In the Treatise  his argument does 
turn largely on mere conceivability, and the suggestion of arbitrariness is  relatively muted: “we might ... 
have substituted any other idea” (T87, cf. T111-2).  In the Abstract  this suggestion is expanded: “The 
mind can always conceive  any effect to follow from any cause, and indeed any event to follow upon 
another” (A650).  By the time of the Enquiry  arbitrariness has clearly become Hume’s principal 
emphasis, as it remains when he repeats the argument in the Dialogues : “every chimera of his fancy 
would be upon an equal footing” (D145); “he would never, of himself, give a satisfactory account for his 
preferring one of them to the rest” (D146). 26 
 modest principle that if the inference from cause to effect is to be justifiable a priori , 
then the connection between cause and effect must be at least to some extent non-arbitrary, and an examination of the cause must be able to yield some ground, however slight, for expecting that particular effect in preference to others.  In adopting this compelling principle, Hume is not in any way committing himself to the deductivist 
view, that the only arguments which have any force are those which are logically 
conclusive.
18 
Having completed the principal arguments of Part i, Hume briefly states its 
conclusion: “In vain, therefore, should we pretend to determine any single event, or infer any cause or effect, without the assistance of observation and experience.” (E30).  He then adds two paragraphs spelling out some implications for science in general and for applied mathematics in particular.  First, science has absolute limits, in that it cannot possibly uncover the “ultimate springs and principles” of nature: in other words it cannot provide pure rational insight into why things behave as they do.  Such insight 
                                               
 
18 This part of Stove’s case is criticised by Morris on the ground that Hume is here “exclusively 
and explicitly concerned with deductive forms of argument” (1988, p. 56).  In fact Hume is explicit  
about this only in the Abstract version, but Morris’ point still has force because Hume clearly takes for 
granted in the Treatise  too that a priori  evidence must yield demonstrative certainty, and such an 
assumption could explain why Hume might be content to argue from mere conceivability at this stage in his argument, without implying any corresponding deductivism about a posteriori evidence.  The same 
assumption plays a role in the Enquiry  version later on (see §3.2 below), and its importance to Hume’s 
philosophy is also apparent elsewhere, for example in his well-known search for the impression of necessary connexion (it can explain why he assumes that any would-be a priori  impression of necessity 
must yield certain knowledge of causal connexions, but does not make the same demand of an a 
posteriori  impression – a puzzle that vexes Craig 1987, pp. 93-100). 27 
 would require an a priori  grasp of causal relations, which Hume’s arguments have 
ruled out, and so the most we can hope for is “to reduce the principles, productive of natural phaenomena, to a greater simplicity, and to resolve the many particular effects into a few general causes” (E30).  Scientists can continue to search for systematic order in the operations of nature, but they cannot aspire to an ultimate explanation of why 
things are ordered in the way that they are. 
Applied (“mixed”) mathematics might seem to provide an exception to this rule, 
since it appears to consist of rational deductions from the a priori  principles of 
geometry and arithmetic.  But Hume points out that any piece of applied mathematics also presupposes certain physical laws, for example the conservation of momentum, and any such law is incurably a posteriori .  So although a priori  mathematical 
reasoning certainly has a part to play in the application of such laws, “to determine their influence in particular instances”, it remains true that “the discovery of the law itself is owing merely to experience, and all the abstract reasonings in the world could never lead us one step towards the knowledge of it” (E31). 
2.3 “All Probable Arguments Presuppose that 
Nature is Uniform” 
The first paragraph of Part ii provides a summary of what Hume takes his argument to 
have established so far, and the second announces his intentions for what follows: 28 
 ... When it is asked, What is the nature of all our reasonings concerning matter of fact?  the proper 
answer seems to be, that they are founded on the relation of cause and effect.  When again it is 
asked, What is the foundation of all our reasonings and conclusions concerning that relation?  it 
may be replied in one word, E XPERIENCE .  But if we still carry on our sifting humour, and ask, 
What is the foundation of all conclusions from experience?  this implies a new question... 
 I shall content myself, in this section, with an easy task, and shall pretend [i.e. aspire] only to 
give a negative answer to the question here proposed.  I say then, that, even after we have 
experience of the operations of cause and effect, our conclusions from that experience are not 
founded on reasoning, or any process of the understanding. (E32) 
Hume then embarks, in the very long third paragraph, on a slightly unfocused 
discussion that combines two distinguishable lines of thought, the first of which can be represented as follows: 
 
       
(6)  All probable arguments (moral 
arguments, those concerning matter of 
fact) are founded on experience.  (7)  All arguments from experience proceed 
upon the supposition that the future will be 
conformable to the past 
 
 
(8)  All probable arguments (moral arguments, 
those concerning matter of fact) proceed upon 
the supposition that nature is uniform, and in 
particular, that similar causes will in the future 
have similar effects to those which they have 
had in the past [the Uniformity Principle or UP] 
This part of Hume’s argument is perhaps the least explicit of any, but as we shall see it 
can nevertheless be “reconstructed” with reasonable confidence on the basis of what he says both before and after it. 29 
 The quotation above from the first paragraph of Part ii makes clear that Hume’s 
motive for investigating arguments from experience is to shed light on the general nature of probable reasoning (reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence) – this will explain the inference from (6) to (8) in the structure diagram.  His investigation begins negatively, with a reminder that our experiential reasonings cannot possibly be 
based on any sensory perception of objects’ “secret powers”.  But the positive account 
soon follows: 
notwithstanding this ignorance of natural powers and principles, we always presume, when we see 
like sensible qualities, that they have like secret powers, and expect, that effects, similar to those which we have experienced, will follow from them. (E33) 
That this is indeed Hume’s positive account is made clear by an otherwise puzzling 
back-reference two pages later, which he makes while summarising this part of his argument, and which cannot sensibly be interpreted as referring to anything else: “We have said, ... that all our experimental conclusions pro ceed upon the supposition, that 
the future will be conformable to the past” (E35).  So Hume clearly takes himself to have stated that (7) all arguments from experience, and hence (8) all probable reasonings (since these are all based on experience), “proceed upon the supposition” that nature is uniform: that similar causes will, in the future, have similar effects to those which they have had in the past.  Let us call this supposition the Uniformity Principle, or UP for short. 
We have here reached the pivot of Hume’s argument.  For most of what he has 
said so far has been devoted to establishing proposition (8) – that all probable                  30 
 reasonings “proceed upon the supposition” of the Uniformity Principle – while most of 
what follows will be devoted to showing that the Uniformity Principle has no possible foundation in reason or the understanding.  And it is from these two results that Hume draws his famous conclusion that our beliefs in [absent] matter of fact and real existence are “ not founded on reasoning, or any process of the understanding” (E32). 
2.4 “Foundation in the Understanding” and 
“Rational Justification” 
Before proceeding further with the detail of Hume’s argument, it is worth drawing 
attention here to an important terminological point which might otherwise prompt objections later on.  This concerns the apparently somewhat different connotations of, on the one hand, Hume’s phrase “foundation in the understanding” and its cognates, which he commonly uses to express his conclusions, and on the other hand, the word “justification” and its cognates, which for the sake of brevity and convenience I shall be using a great deal in my own articulation of his position. 
The distinction here centres on the notion of warrant  – for to say that a belief is 
“unjustified” is to say that it is, in some respect or from some perspective, unwarranted , whereas an increasingly fashionable view in recent years (at least 
amongst historically sensitive scholars) avers that when Hume describes a belief as having “no foundation in the understanding” he means something quite different.  The most effective spokesman for this view is, in my opinion, Don Garrett: 31 
  The conclusion of Hume’s famous argument is widely regarded as an extremely negative 
evaluation of the evidentiary value of inductive inferences, and is often paraphrased as the claim 
that inductive arguments never provide any real “evidence” or “grounds” for their conclusions; that inductive inferences are “unreasonable”, “irrational”, and/or “unwarranted”; or that the premises of inductive arguments do not render their conclusions “more probable”.  ...  
 More recently, however, a number of commentators have maintained that Hume’s argument is 
not a radical attack on induction at all, but is to be understood more restrictedly, as an attack only 
on narrow “deductivistic” or “rationalistic” conceptions  of inductive inference.  ... I propose and 
defend a different interpretation of Hume’s conclusion, according to which it is not a direct denial of the evidential value of inductive inferences on any conception of them, but is instead a 
straightforward negative conclusion, within cognitive psychology, about the causes of inductive inference. 
  (manuscript of Garrett, forthcoming, beginning of Chapter 4) 
As Garrett hints, the issue here is clouded by the influence of another fashionable view 
which he rejects and I shall later endorse (in §§6.2-3), namely, that Hume’s notion of “reason” is fundamentally ambiguous.  Both views, in their different ways, attempt to make sense of the fact that Hume’s attitude to induction, even after his supposedly devastating critique of it, is fundamentally positive: he continues to use, and to recommend, “the experimental method”.  My own preferred way of resolving the apparent conflict is to posit an ambiguity in his notion of reason so that, in his assessment of inductive inference, a denial of reasonableness in the sense he opposes can be combined with an affirmation of reasonableness in the sense he accepts.  Garrett’s way is more radical, and involves denying that Hume’s argument is judgemental of inductive inference in any sense whatever. 32 
 Garrett’s interpretation of Hume’s view of reason is accordingly relatively 
straightforward: 
 Few interpretive remarks about Hume meet with more widespread agreement than the 
common claim that Hume uses the term “reason” in several different senses in his writings.  If I am 
right, however, few interpretive claims could be further from the truth.  ... Hume uses the term “reason” quite unequivocally to refer to the inferential faculty – a faculty that produces two kinds of arguments, demonstrative  and probable .  In arguing that inductive inferences are not 
“determin’d by reason”, Hume is neither expressing an evaluation  of the epistemic worth of 
inductive inferences, nor making a claim restricted to an arbitrarily narrowed  sense of “reason”.  
Nor is he denying that inductive inferences are a species  of reasoning.  He is denying only that we 
come to engage  in this species of reasoning as a result of any piece of reasoning about  it. 
  (manuscript of Garrett, forthcoming, end of Chapter 4) 
As a bold, simple and elegant hypothesis about what is going on in Hume’s argument, 
this obviously deserves to be taken very seriously. 
But however bold and elegant Garrett’s approach may be, and however widely 
applicable to other aspects of Hume’s philosophy that have traditionally (and perhaps indeed wrongly) been thought of as judgemental rather than descriptive, I do not believe that it can ultimately provide a plausible account of the logic of Hume’s reasoning, nor of some of the statements of his conclusion.  To take the latter first, and to anticipate slightly the discussion to come in §4.1 and §6.1, Hume does not merely deny that we engage  in induction on the basis of “reasoning”;  he also explicitly denies 
that individual causal inferences  are “determin’d by reason” (e.g. T92, T97) and even 
that particular inductive conclusions  are “founded on reasoning” (e.g. E32, E162) or 33 
 on “the understanding” (e.g. E42).  Such language seems clearly to be inconsistent with 
Garrett’s account, or at best an indication of careless expression on Hume’s part. 
Harder to discount is the major role that considerations of rational warrant  play in 
the logic of Hume’s reasoning.  Again we must to some extent anticipate later discussion (in this case Chapter 3, and especially §3.1), where it will become clear that 
Hume’s entire argumentative strategy is to undermine the pretensions of the 
Uniformity Principle to any rational foundation, and hence to deny that probable inferences are founded on reason.  And the first point to make here is that the possible species of rational foundation that Hume considers are not confined to argument , as 
they ought to be if “reason” is, as Garrett says, just “the inferential faculty – a faculty that produces arguments”.  For twice in the Enquiry  (if not, admittedly, in the Treatise ) 
Hume explicitly denies that the Uniformity Principle can be founded on intuition  (E34, 
E37), a capacity which involves immediate perception rather than inference.  Quite apart from its role here in Hume’s argument, it is surely implausible to claim, as Garrett apparently must, that intuition falls outside the province of reason. 
But a second and more significant point is that when Hume does turn to consider 
whether the Uniformity Principle can be founded on inference  proper (see §3.2), his 
argument seems clearly to revolve around the denial that there is any legitimate  method 
of inferring the Uniformity Principle, whereas if his concern were only to deny that ratiocination  plays a role in our belief in uniformity, then it is difficult to see why 
questions of legitimacy should have any relevance.  There may be all sorts of irregular bogus arguments for the Uniformity Principle, any one of which could perhaps causally underlie a person’s cognitive psychology and incline him to believe in uniformity, but 34 
 Hume consistently treats an argument’s defectiveness as providing an absolutely 
conclusive ground for denying that the argument could either have reason as its source, or constitute the basis in reason for our making probable inferences.
19 
In short, the fundamental objection to Garrett’s account is that it pays insufficient 
regard to the normative  aspects of Hume’s conception of reason (or rather, as I shall 
argue in §6.2, two such conceptions).  Hume does not investigate the limits of reason – 
notably what argument can and cannot do – by the predominantly empirical methods that would be appropriate to cognitive psychology;  instead he draws his conclusions on the basis of what would, and would not, provide a legitimate reason or a rational warrant.  Indeed his ability to appeal to a genuinely normative notion of reason is, as we shall see later, crucial to the coherence of his entire philosophical enterprise. 
                                               
 
19 The main bogus argument that Hume discusses is, of course, the circular probable inference in 
favour of uniformity, which he rules out of account not on the empirical psychological ground that no 
such argument ever in fact occurs to us , but rather the logical ground that such an argument, even if it 
did occur to us, would be rationally unwarranted because circular  (E35-6).  To be fair to Garrett, in the 
Treatise  Hume sees the offensive circularity as being not purely logical , but at least in part causal :  “The 
same principle cannot be both the cause and effect of another” (T90).  And this impossibility of a causal circle can admittedly provide some basis, quite independently of considerations of rational warrant, for 
denying that the Uniformity Principle is founded on such circular “reasoning”.  This point, together with 
the absence from the Treatise  of the line of thought explained in §3.1 below, makes Garrett’s account far 
stronger as an interpretation of Hume’s argument in that work than in the Enquiry  (unsurprisingly in the 
light of §1.2).  However I do not see how he can explain away the clear language of rational warrant that Hume uses, even in the Treatise , when presenting what I shall later call  (in §4.2) his argument’s “coda”.  
There, at T90-1, he speaks for example of “solid” and “weak” reasoning, discusses whether one proposition “can” (or “can never”) “prove” another, and gives the fact that “the foregoing reasoning had 
no just foundation” as a decisive ground for concluding that the reasoning in question cannot constitute a 
basis in reason for our inductive inferences. 35 
 In view of all these points, I shall in what follows take “justification” and cognate 
expressions to be generally appropriate abbreviations of such Humean phrases as “foundation in reason/the understanding”.  They have the considerable merit of brevity, even if they admittedly lack some of the flavour of the original. 
2.5 The Uniformity Principle and its Presupposition 
To return now to our analysis of Hume’s argument, in the Treatise  the Uniformity 
Principle and its pivotal role are made far more explicit than in the Enquiry : 
If reason determin’d us [to make probable inferences], it wou’d proceed upon that principle, that 
instances, of which we have had no experience, must resemble those, of which we have had 
experience, and that the course of nature continues always uniformly the same .  In order therefore 
to clear up this matter, let us consider all the arguments, upon which such a proposition may be suppos’d to be founded ... (T89) 
But this very explicitness has, I suspect, seduced many commentators into 
misunderstanding both the nature of Hume’s principle and its supposed function within probable reasoning.  Indeed it may be that the misinterpretation of this particular passage in the Treatise  is primarily responsible for the common assumption that Hume 
is a deductivist.  Here Hume claims that probable inferences rationally depend in some sense upon the principle that unobserved instances must resemble observed instances .  
One natural interpretation of this claim is that the Uniformity Principle is (or ought to be) an implicit “middle term” of any such inference, without which the inference would be unjustified.  So a probable inference, when fully spelled out, might take the form: 36 
 (M)  All observed A’s have been B’s 
  Unobserved instances must resemble observed instances 
 ∴ Any unobserved A is a B 
Hume’s complaint against the rationality of induction then appears as the simple point 
that the second premise here, the Uniformity Principle, which is needed to provide (in Humean language) a “medium” between the first premise and the conclusion, is unavailable: the principle can itself be given no rational justification, and hence probable inference, which depends on it, is unwarranted.  This “unavailable medium” interpretation is not incontestable (cf. T96n, 104),  but it apparently derives strong support from what Hume says in the Enquiry  when discussing the problem of inferring 
the powers of unobserved objects from those of observed objects:  “There is required a medium, which may enable the mind to draw such an inference, if indeed it be drawn by reasoning and argument” (E34);  “Where is the medium, the interposing ideas, which join propositions so very wide of each other?” (E37). 
However the question now arises what it is about inferences of form (M) which 
according to Hume renders them justified, in contrast to their allegedly enthymematic and therefore unjustified cousins of the form: 
(E)  All observed A’s have been B’s 
 ∴ Any unobserved A is a B 37 
 Many commentators on Hume have apparently thought the answer to this question too 
obvious even to require discussion: Hume must believe that (M) is rational and that (E) is not because he takes (M), but not (E), to be deductively valid.  So when Hume states that probable arguments are “founded on” (T90), or “proceed upon” (T89, E35), or “suppose, as their foundation” (E37) an assumption of uniformity, what he means is, in 
Stove’s words, that “Inductive arguments are all invalid as they stand, and it would be 
necessary, in order to turn them into valid arguments, to add to their premises [the Uniformity Principle]” (1973 p. 44 cf. 1965 pp. 203-4).  And this of course would strongly suggest that Hume is, as Stove claims, a deductivist, since he is apparently taking for granted that an argument is reasonable only if it has deductive force, so that anyone who advances an argument which is not deductively valid must either be arguing unreasonably, or else must be presupposing some implicit “middle” premise (or premises) which, when added to the argument, would render it valid.  On this account, therefore, Hume is both a deductivist and what we might call a “quasi-deductivist”, in that he takes a probable argument to be in effect a disguised deduction, with the Uniformity Principle as a suppressed premise.
20 
It is simplistic to assume, however, that the “unavailable medium” interpretation 
necessarily implies that Hume views the Uniformity Principle as the missing link in an   
                                               
 
20 A quasi-deductivist interpretation of Hume’s argument need not imply, however, that he is 
himself a deductivist, for it might be thought that he uses it to show the limits of some variety of “rationalism” rather than as an argument in propria persona .  This approach, which is similar in spirit to 
that of Beauchamp et alia (to be considered in §6.3), is for example taken by Baier (1991, p. 68). 38 
 otherwise enthymematic deduction .  Many have indeed assumed this, but since they 
have done so without comment this may have been for no better reason than that they associated the notion of a “middle term” (or suppressed premise) with Aristotelian (or modern) formal logic, and hence with deductive systems.
21  In the interpretation of 
Hume, however, such considerations should carry very little weight, because Hume 
inherited his “logic” more from Locke than from Aristotle, and inherited with it a 
highly dismissive attitude towards deductive syllogistic theory (see for example E163).  When Locke and Hume talk about a “medium”, therefore, we should certainly not assume that they have in mind an exclusively deductive paradigm of inference.  Here is Locke defining demonstration and probability (1690, IV xv 1): 
As Demonstration is the shewing the Agreement, or Disagreement of two Ideas , by the intervention 
of one or more Proofs, which have a constant, immutable, and visible connexion one with another: so Probability  is nothing but the appearance of such an Agreement, or Disagreement, by the 
intervention of Proofs, whose connexion is not constant and immutable, or at least is not perceived to be so, but is, or appears for the most part to be so, and is enough to induce the Mind to judge  the 
Proposition to be true, or false, rather than the contrary. 
“Proof” is Locke’s official term (IV ii 3) for what he elsewhere calls an intermediate 
idea or a medium (e.g. IV iv 7, IV xvii 15).  But there is no suggestion here that these 
                                                
21 Flew (1961) pp. 70-1 certainly seems to be misled by the Aristotelian model.  His own exclusive 
focus on universal inductive arguments (criticised in §1.3 above), together with Hume’s talk of a “medium”, apparently suggest to him the idea of a syllogism, after which he repeatedly alleges, without any supporting argument, that Hume takes a probable argument to be a “[broken-backed] syllogism” or a 
“failed deduction” (pp. 71-89;  cf. Flew 1986, pp. 52-5). 39 
 “middle terms” are restricted to demonstrative reasoning: on the contrary, Locke 
clearly states that the difference between demonstrative and probable reasoning is entirely non-formal, residing not in the presence or absence of “proofs”, but solely in the strength of connexion between the “proofs” concerned.  He re-emphasises this point many times, particularly at IV xvii 16: 
There are other Ideas , whose Agreement, or Disagreement, can no otherwise be judged of, but by 
the intervention of others, which have not a certain Agreement with the Extremes, but an usual or likely one: And in these it is, that the Judgment  is properly exercised, which is the acquiescing of 
the Mind, that any Ideas  do agree, by comparing them with such probable Mediums . 
So Locke is clearly happy with the notion of a “probable medium”, a “middle 
term” whose connexions with the premise and the conclusion of the argument in which it occurs are less than deductively certain.  And given Locke’s manifest influence on Hume (evident for example at T124 and the footnote to E56, where Locke is apparently acknowledged as the primary source of Hume’s initial dichotomy between demonstrative and probable reasoning), this is already sufficient to undermine any case for Hume’s being a quasi-deductivist which is based solely on his demanding a “medium” for inductive inferences.
22  More direct evidence to the same effect, 
               
                                                
22 Owen (1992) draws a far more radical lesson from Locke’s influence, questioning even whether 
Hume employed the now standard propositional model of arguments as opposed to the “series of ideas” model suggested by Locke’s words.  I have doubts whether the latter is independently significant or even coherent (e.g. with inferences involving quantification), but in any case Hume’s language in the Enquiry  
(e.g. E34) makes clear that he is very comfortable with the propositional framework, even if he still 
sometimes lapses into Lockean talk of “interposing ideas” (E37). 40 
 moreover, is furnished by Hume’s own texts, most notably a passage in his Dialogues  
(D143, cf. D176), where the a priori  theist Demea refers to the “mediums” by which 
the empirical theist Cleanthes endeavours to establish the existence of God, and complains precisely because these mediums are merely probable: 
... still less can I approve of the mediums, by which you endeavour to establish [God’s existence 
and nature].  What!  No demonstration of the being of a God!  No abstract arguments!  No proofs 
a priori !  ... Can we reach no farther in this subject than experience and probability? 
This passage illustrates that Hume, like Locke, is quite untainted by the now apparently 
common but always gratuitous assumption that only a demonstrative argument can contain a “middle term”.  One might mischievously suggest, therefore, that those commentators who make such an assumption the basis of their interpretation of his argument concerning induction reveal not so much Hume’s deductivist prejudices, but rather their own! 
Although we have seen enough to indicate that the quasi-deductivist interpretation 
is textually and historically unwarranted, it is not yet clear whether there is a coherent alternative account of the supposed logical role of Hume’s Uniformity Principle.  Thus, in particular, we have as yet no explanation of why Hume should take for granted that inferences of form (E) presuppose (“are founded on”, ”suppose, as their foundation” etc.) such a principle, unless he is after all operating within a deductive paradigm.  Two connected issues arise here: first, the kind of presupposition that Hume has in mind; and secondly, the nature of the principle which is according to him thus presupposed.  In addressing the first of these, we should be careful at least initially to interpret the        41 
 notion of “Humean presupposition” as broadly as possible, so as not to prejudge the 
issue in favour of a deductivist or other narrow interpretation.  We can, however, give the notion some specific content by observing its function within Hume’s argument, where he is explicitly concerned with establishing whether or not inductive inferences are founded on reason, and ultimately gives a negative answer on the ground that an 
alleged presupposition of such inferences is not itself so founded.  This suggests that an 
appropriate sense of presupposition might be spelt out roughly as follows: an inference 
(or, in an extended sense, a person who makes that inference) presupposes some proposition if in order for that inference to be rationally well-founded, the proposition in question must also itself be rationally well-founded .  Such an account is indeed 
desirably broad, for it is consistent with a wide range of different views – including deductivist views – regarding what counts as rational well-foundedness (i.e. having an adequate foundation in reason or “rational justification”).  But this provides a sufficient understanding of Humean presupposition to enable us now to enquire into the nature of Hume’s Uniformity Principle by asking the very question to which that principle is intended to provide an answer: what exactly is being presupposed in this sense by 
someone who employs an inference of form (E)?  
One modest, and perhaps at first apparently trivial, answer to this question is as 
follows: when we use an inference of form (E) to extrapolate from observed to unobserved (for brevity, from “past” to “future”), we are presupposing that past instances are evidentially relevant  to future instances, or in other words, that the nature 
of past instances gives some evidence concerning the nature of future instances.  This is not all, however, for when we make a “probable” inference we suppose that the 42 
 evidence provided by past instances is positively  relevant, in that future instances are 
likely to resemble  past instances rather than, for example, constrasting with them.  
Hence any probable inference presupposes that past instances have a positive evidential 
relevance  to future instances: this presupposition can very naturally, though loosely, be 
expressed by saying that future instances will resemble past instances  (cf. T89), or that 
the future will be conformable to the past  (E35), or that the past is a rule for the future  
(cf. E38), and so on.  I suggest, therefore, the following interpretation: when Hume claims that probable reasoning presupposes the Uniformity Principle, he is simply making the straightforward point that any probable argument, by its very nature, treats past instances as positively evidentially relevant  to future instances.  This interpretation 
makes good sense of Hume’s claim and the various ways in which he expresses it, explains why he thought it too obvious to require further elaboration, and is also entirely consistent with his subsequent procedure.  For if it is true that any probable argument treats past instances as evidentially relevant to future instances, and if it can be shown that there is no good reason for so treating them, then (at least on the broadly “foundationalist” conception of reason which Hume’s treatment of presupposition shows him to be adopting here – cf. Stroud 1977, pp. 60-2) the reasonableness of all probable inference will indeed be undermined. 
It is a significant virtue of Hume’s argument, interpreted in this way, that it does 
not commit him to any very specific view regarding either what counts as rational well-foundedness (as we saw above), or what counts as evidential relevance (it is, for example, consistent with the deductivist assumption that the only kind of evidential connexion that carries any force is deductive implication).  This means that Hume need 43 
 give no such hostage to fortune – if his argument succeeds in showing that probable 
reasoning is not rationally well-founded, then this conclusion can stand even if his own personal theory of evidential relevance (whatever that may turn out to be) is rejected.  All this might revive the suspicion that Hume is himself, after all, a quasi-deductivist (and hence very probably a deductivist too), even if he has ingeniously succeeded in 
insulating his famous argument from these personal weaknesses.  But fortunately such 
a suspicion can be decisively refuted, ironically by turning on its head a criticism that has often been made of him. 
Those who take Hume to be a quasi-deductivist are fond of accusing him of 
inconsistency or oversight, on the grounds that his proposed Uniformity Principle is actually quite inadequate to fulfil the role that he supposedly requires of it (e.g. Flew 1961, p. 74; Stove 1965 p. 204; Ayer 1972, pp. 20-1).  This role demands that the Uniformity Principle be sufficiently strong to transform (at least many) “correct” inductions  into deductions  – to enable a conclusion about future instances to be drawn 
deductively from premises which describe only past instances.  And it is clearly impossible to satisfy this requirement with the vague formulations of the Uniformity Principle that appear in the Enquiry .  The more explicit principle of the Treatise  is 
perhaps more powerful, at least if interpreted as stating literally that future instances 
will resemble past instances in any considered respect .  But then such a principle is far 
too strong to play the role of legitimating inductive inference, for it is utterly implausible and has been falsified innumerable times – as for example when the first black swan was observed.  The moral is evident: any principle strong enough to transform “correct” inductions into deductions will also be strong enough similarly to 44 
 transform many “incorrect” inductions, and will certainly therefore be false.  Evident 
this may be, and damning for quasi-deductivism, but it would come as no surprise to Hume, who recognises explicitly that even “good” probable arguments can fail despite what he takes to be the fact that nature is uniform.  In Section I iii 15 of the Treatise , 
for example, “Rules by which to judge of causes and effects”, he makes it abundantly 
clear that inductions are incurably fallible, even on the supposition that nature is 
uniform , since we can never be certain that our past observations have taken all 
relevant causal factors into account (T175 cf. E86-7).  So if he is even minimally consistent in this sort of inductive fallibilism, Hume cannot be  a quasi-deductivist.  
(Note however that this does not yet quite settle the question of whether he may be some other kind of deductivist – a task to be completed in §5.1 below). 45 
 Chapter 3   Seeking a Foundation for the 
Uniformity Principle 
3.1 “The Uniformity Principle can only be Justified 
by Argument” 
In the previous chapter (§2.3) we examined the first distinguishable line of thought in 
the long third paragraph of Section IV Part ii.  It is now time to move on to the second line of thought, which can be represented as follows: 
 
(3)  The sensible qualities of objects do not 
reveal their causes or their effects, and there 
is no known connexion between an object’s 
sensible qualities and its “secret powers” 
 
   
(10)  The Uniformity Principle is not 
intuitively certain  (9)  The Uniformity Principle cannot be 
rationally justified by anything that we learn 
through the senses about object’s “secret 
powers” 
 
  
(11)  The Uniformity Principle can only be 
rationally justified on the basis of a good 
argument (there must be a medium  for 
proving it) 
 
As in Part i Hume emphasises our inability to discern an object’s causes or effects by 
mere observation of its “sensible qualities”, but here the point of doing so becomes 46 
 clear only after he has sketched his positive account of experimental reasoning based 
on the Uniformity Principle: 
... there is no known connexion between the sensible qualities and the secret powers; and 
consequently ... the mind is not led to form such a conclusion concerning their constant and regular 
conjunction, by any thing which it knows of their nature. (E33) 
This passage spells out clearly the implication from (3) to (9) as represented in the 
structure diagram above (though (9) as stated in the diagram makes explicit the contrast which Hume apparently intends between sensory  knowledge of object’s secret powers, 
which he here denies, and inferential  knowledge, which he has not yet ruled out).  At 
this point Hume treats the Uniformity Principle as a straightforward proposition  
“concerning [the] constant and regular conjunction ... between [an object’s] sensible qualities and [that object’s] secret powers”, but he soon goes on to pose the question of its justification in a different way, treating the principle as something more like a rule 
of inference : 
These two propositions are far from being the same, I have found that such an object has always 
been attended with such an effect , and I foresee, that other objects, which are, in appearance, 
similar, will be attended with similar effects .  I shall allow, if you please, that the one proposition 
may justly be inferred from the other ...  But if you insist, that the inference is made by a chain of 
reasoning, I desire you to produce that reasoning. (E34) 
Hume betrays no awareness of any shift in his procedure here, so we must assume that 
he would draw no distinction between the justification of an inference from P (a 
proposition about past instances) to Q (a proposition about future instances), and the 47 
 justification of the proposition that P implies Q  (in effect the Uniformity Principle).23  
Thus when he immediately continues to say that “The connexion between these propositions is not intuitive.  There is required a medium, which may enable the mind to draw such an inference, if indeed it be drawn by reasoning and argument.” (E34), it indeed seems legitimate to interpret this as a comment about the justification of the 
Uniformity Principle, as represented by the inference from (10) to (11) in the structure 
diagram above. 
3.2 “There is No Good Argument for the Uniformity 
Principle” 
The stage is now set for the climax of Hume’s argument concerning induction, in 
which he denies the possibility of any good reasoning at all which could justify the Uniformity Principle and hence provide a rational ground for probable inference.  Many commentators have treated this part as though it were virtually the whole of Hume’s argument,
24 so it is worth recalling that in the Enquiry  it is not only preceded 
by Part i, but is also introduced by the line of thought outlined in §3.1 above, in which 
                                                
23 It is worth noting in passing the significance of this.  If Hume (correctly) draws no fundamental 
distinction between a proof of Q from P (i.e. P  Q) and a proof that P implies Q 
(i.e.  P→Q)  then he cannot consistently distinguish between types of argument on the basis merely of 
the modality of their premises (which as we saw in §1.4 above is alleged by Stove). 
24 Fogelin (1985), for example, calls the entire argument concerning induction Hume’s 
“no-argument argument” (p. 46). 48 
 Hume takes the trouble to argue that some reasoning is necessary if the Uniformity 
Principle is to be justified, a point which he apparently takes more or less for granted in the Treatise  and Abstract .
25   
The structure of this most famous part of Hume’s argument is admirably clear: 
 
 
(8)  All probable arguments 
(moral arguments, those 
concerning matter of fact) 
proceed upon the supposition 
that nature is uniform, and in 
particular, that similar causes 
will in the future have similar 
effects to those which they 
have had in the past [the 
Uniformity Principle or UP] 
   
(13)  The contrary of UP 
can be distinctly 
conceived, and is therefore 
possible 
 
  
(14)  There can be no 
demonstrative argument 
for UP 
 
  
(16)  Any probable argu-
ment for UP would be 
circular   
(12)  All reasonings are 
either demonstrative or 
probable 
 
 
 
(15)  If there is a good 
argument for UP, it 
must be probable only 
 
  
(17)  There is no good 
argument of any kind 
for UP 
 
                                                
25 Jacobson (1987) argues that it is Hume’s preliminary line of thought regarding our ignorance of 
powers which carries his main sceptical thrust, and she accordingly sees his “circularity” argument as a 
merely secondary move designed to show that the sceptical gap cannot be plugged by justifying the Uniformity Principle.  We saw earlier (in §2.2 note 14) that her interpretation is hard to square with the Treatise , but it also seems to misrepresent Hume’s own view of his primary argument in the Enquiry , as 
revealed at E39: “it is not reasoning which engages us to suppose the past resembling the future, and to expect similar effects from causes, which are, to appearance, similar.  This is the proposition which I 
intended to enforce in the present section.” 49 
 It starts with the general claim (12) that “All reasonings may be divided into two kinds, 
namely demonstrative reasoning ... and moral reasoning, or that concerning matter of fact and existence [i.e. probable reasoning]” (E35).  The inference from (13) to (14) is then quickly drawn:
26  “That there are no demonstrative arguments in the case, seems 
evident; since it implies no contradiction, that the course of nature may change ... Now 
whatever is intelligible, and can be distinctly conceived, implies no contradiction, and 
can never be proved false by any demonstrative argument or abstract reasoning à priori ”.  Propositions (12) and (14) together imply (15): “If we be, therefore, engaged 
by arguments to put trust in past experience, and make it the standard of our future judgment, these arguments must be probable only”.  But now the previous conclusion (8) can be appealed to in order to show (16) “that there is no argument of this kind” (E35).  For (8) states that all probable arguments presuppose the Uniformity Principle.  “To endeavour, therefore the proof of [UP] by probable arguments ... must be evidently going in a circle, and taking that for granted, which is the very point in question.” (E35-6). 
Though superficially very straightforward, there is a lot going on here beneath the 
surface.  For example, Hume is certainly not being entirely explicit when he states that “all reasonings” are either demonstrative or probable and goes on to rule out the possibility of either type of argument for the Uniformity Principle.  For he was surely 
                                               
 
26 This is the only essential use that Hume makes of his “argument from distinct conceivability” in 
Section IV of the Enquiry , since as we saw in §2.2, Stove is mistaken in seeing it as the sole basis of the 
inference from (3) to (4). 50 
 well aware that philosophers could, and would, concoct various defective  arguments to 
support this principle – indeed he considers such an argument himself, at E36-8.  What he is denying, therefore, is that any good  argument is available for the purpose, on the 
grounds: first, that all good  arguments are either demonstrative or probable; secondly, 
that there cannot be a good  demonstrative argument for the falsity of what is distinctly 
conceivable; and thirdly, that a good  probable argument cannot be circular.
27  T h i s  
passage is, in fact, an illustration of a general rule of Hume interpretation, that when he speaks of “all [or no] arguments [reasonings/inferences]”, the qualification “good” is usually implicit (see also for example T142, E150, D205).  This is perhaps not surprising given the normativity of his notion of “reason” (as discussed in §2.4 above and to be considered further in §6.2 below). 
Hume’s grounds for ruling out the possibility of a good demonstrative or probable 
argument to sanction the inference from past to future also merit some discussion.  Here are two candidate arguments, one of each form: 
(D)  C’s have always been attended with effect E 
  A l l  C’s have similar effects, no matter when they are observed 
 ∴ Future C’s will be attended with effect E 
                                               
 
27 The first of these three points will suffice if the terms “demonstrative” and “probable” are 
themselves interpreted normatively, so that an argument only counts as  being of the appropriate type if it 
is a good  instance.  But Hume himself does not consistently interpret them in this way, and in the 
Treatise  especially seems perfectly content to talk of “fallacious” demonstrations (e.g. T53, 80) or 
“unphilosophical” probable reasonings (Section I iii 13). 51 
 (P)  C’s have always been attended with effect E 
  In the past, similar objects have always turned out to have similar effects 
 ∴ Future C’s will be attended with effect E 
(D) indeed seems to be a deductively valid argument, and might thus appear to 
contradict Hume’s assertion “that there are no demonstrative arguments in the case”.  But the contradiction is only superficial, for Hume’s interest here is clearly epistemological rather than pedantically logical:
28 what he really means to say is that 
the inference from past to future cannot be  accomplished by means of a demonstrative 
argument whose additional premises (if any) are already known to be true  – (D) does 
not qualify as such an argument, because its second “middle” premise cannot be known unless we have already found some way of gaining access to knowledge of future C’s.  
As for (P), Hume would, I believe, acknowledge that this argument is in some sense a “good” probable inference, and would accordingly countenance it in other contexts as 
a means of establishing the properties of future C’s  (cf. T173-4).  The problem is that 
(P) is useless as an attempt to establish the rational credentials of the Uniformity Principle [UP], for as a probable argument it must itself presuppose this principle, and therefore cannot be used to support it.  This circularity can be spelt out on the basis of our earlier analysis of Humean presupposition: an inference such as (P) is rationally 
                                               
 
28 Hume’s disregard for logical precision verges on carelessness when he specifies at E34 the 
premise and conclusion of the would-be inference discussed here.  For he is clearly interested in an inference from the effects of past objects to the effects of future objects, not as his words strictly imply 
from past personal observations (“I have found ...”) to a personal prediction (“I foresee ...”). 52 
 well-founded only if UP is rationally well-founded, and it follows that the use of (P) to 
establish the rational well-foundedness of UP must inevitably “take that for granted, which is the very point in question”.
29 
Given Hume’s understanding of “demonstrative” and “probable” reasoning, then, 
he seems to be quite right to conclude that neither of these can furnish an argument 
capable of rationally justifying the Uniformity Principle in a non-circular and well-
founded manner.  But his “no-argument argument” can nevertheless be challenged by resisting his initial assumption (12 in the structure diagram) that “demonstrative” and “probable” arguments, thus understood, are the only two kinds of respectable reasoning available.  Hume apparently makes this claim not out of dogmatism, but simply because he cannot imagine any other legitimate type of reasoning (cf. T90, E36).  And anxious as he is to consider all possibilities, he seems to realise that this might be a weak point in his argument: “there may still remain a suspicion, that the enumeration is not complete” (E39). 
To see how a third “species of reasoning” might escape, so to speak, between the 
horns of Hume’s dichotomy, let us focus on the particular characteristics of demonstrative and probable reasoning that enable him to rule out each of them in turn as a possible source of justification for the Uniformity Principle.  First, then, the reason   
                                               
 
29 This “presuppositional circularity” differs somewhat from the more familiar “deductive 
circularity” of an argument whose conclusion is also one of its premises.  In this sense, contra  Stove 
(1965, p. 205), a circular argument need not be deductively valid. 53 
 he is confident that no demonstrative argument can do the job is that such an argument 
always yields total certainty relative to its premises, so the mere distinct conceivability of a change in the course of nature (13) is sufficient to show that the Uniformity Principle cannot be established by demonstration (14) no matter what our premises about the past might be.  By contrast, his reason for denying that any probable 
argument can establish the Uniformity Principle is that all such arguments are founded 
on experience (7) and that they therefore themselves rely (8) on precisely the kind of extrapolation from past to future that the Uniformity Principle itself is needed to justify; hence any such argument for this principle will be viciously circular (16).  Putting these together, it follows that if there were a third form of reasoning which yielded merely probable conclusions (rather than certainties), but did so on a priori  
grounds (rather than by extrapolation from past experience), then this form of reasoning would be completely immune to Hume’s objections: he could not rule out the possibility of such a justification of the Uniformity Principle either on the basis of his argument from distinct conceivability or on the ground of circularity. 
It is highly debatable whether a priori  probabilistic reasoning (based for example 
on the Principle of Indifference, “logical probability” measures, considerations of invariance or other supposedly non-empirical principles) is a genuine possibility or, if it is, whether such reasoning could conceivably provide a justification for the Uniformity Principle.  But those who claim that Hume himself showed this particular route to be a dead end are certainly mistaken, for as we have seen, when he denies that “probable” reasoning could perform such a role, Hume has in mind only inductive 54 
 reasoning from experience, not mathematical probabilistic reasoning that is a priori .30  
There is, then, a definite gap in Hume’s argument – it will be the principal task of Part II of this thesis to examine the question of whether this gap can be exploited by his opponents. 
                                               
 
30 Indeed it is far from clear whether such reasoning, if it exists, should count as “probable” at all, 
given that Hume considers a prioricity  to be almost a defining characteristic of “demonstrative” 
reasoning (T124, A650, E25). 55 
 Chapter 4   The Conc lusion of Hume’s 
Argument, and a Coda 
4.1 Hume’s Conclusion: “Probable Inferences are 
Not Founded on Reason” 
As on many other occasions, Hume leaves his reader to slot into place the final pieces 
of the philosophical jigsaw which he has created.  But if the account given in the previous chapters is correct, the way in which they are intended to fit together is evident from the structure and flow of his argument: 
 
(8)  All probable arguments (moral arguments, 
those concerning matter of fact) proceed upon 
the supposition that nature is uniform, and in 
particular, that similar causes will in the future 
have similar effects to those which they have 
had in the past [the Uniformity Principle or UP] 
 
  
(14)  There is no good argument of any kind for 
the Uniformity Principle 
 
 
(16)  The Uniformity Principle can only be 
rationally justified on the basis of a good 
argument  (19)  CONCLUSION  
 
No probable argument (moral argument, 
reasoning concerning matter of fact) is 
rationally justified, and hence it is not 
reason [but instead custom or habit, a non-
rational instinct] which engages us to make 
probable inferences 
 
  
(18)  The Uniformity Principle cannot be 
rationally justified 
 56 
 The precise nature of Hume’s conclusion may seem unclear from his own words.  
We have already seen that he anticipates it when stating his intentions at E32: 
I say then, that, even after we have experience of the operations of cause and effect, our 
conclusions from that experience are not founded on reasoning, or any process of the 
understanding. 
But when later summing up the section at E39, he expresses his conclusion somewhat 
differently: 
... it is not reasoning which engages us to suppose the past resembling the future, and to expect 
similar effects from causes, which are, to appearance, similar.  This is the proposition which I intended to enforce in the present section. 
There is a subtle difference here: at E32 he is saying that our particular experiential 
conclusions  are not “founded on reasoning, or any process of the understanding”, 
whereas at E39 he is saying that our supposition of the Uniformity Principle  is not so 
founded.  If we move forward to the beginning of Section V, however, we can find at E41 a passage which helps to reconcile these two readings: 
... we ... conclude ... in the foregoing section, that, in all reasonings from experience, there is a step 
taken by the mind, which is not supported by any argument or process of the understanding. 
So all reasonings from experience involve a step, namely the assumption of uniformity, 
which is not supported by “any process of the understanding” – which, indeed, cannot  
    57 
 be so supported if Hume’s argument is correct.  And Hume goes on in Section V to 
provide an alternative explanation of why we make this step:31 it is entirely non-
rational, and is the product not of reason but merely of a particular one of our brute “natural instincts, which no reasoning or process of the thought and understanding is able, either to produce or to prevent” (E46-7).  This instinct is what “makes us expect, 
for the future, a similar train of events with those which have appeared in the past” 
(E44), and Hume accordingly calls it “custom”, or “habit”.  Here, then, is the answer to his original enquiry at E26 regarding “the nature of that evidence, which assures us of any [absent] matter of fact”: 
All inferences from experience, therefore, are effects of custom, not of reasoning. ... Without the 
influence of custom, we should be entirely ignorant of every matter of fact, beyond what is immediately present to our memory and senses. (E43-5) 
                                                
31 Unless Hume’s view of the psychological processes involved has changed dramatically since 
writing the Treatise , he does not mean to say that the assumption of uniformity is an explicit  step in all 
our inferences from experience.  For T104 is unequivocal on the matter: “the understanding or imagination can draw inferences from past experience, without reflecting on [the Uniformity Principle]; 
much more without forming any principle concerning it, or reasoning upon that principle.” 58 
 4.2 Coda: the Irrelevance of Causal Powers, and a 
Parting Shot 
In both the Treatise  and the Enquiry , Hume’s main argument finishes with his 
circularity charge against any would-be “probable” justification of the Uniformity Principle.  But in both he goes on to refute one natural attempt that might be made to justify induction by appeal to objects’ “powers”.
32  In  th e Treatise  the way in which 
Hume introduces this discussion makes very clear its status as an illustration of the scope and force of his argument rather than as an essential part of it: 
 Shou’d any one think to elude this argument; and without determining whether our reasoning 
on this subject be deriv’d from demonstration or probability, pretend that all conclusions from causes and effects are built on solid reasoning: I can only desire, that this reasoning may be produc’d, in order to be expos’d to our examination.  It may, perhaps, be said, that after experience of the constant conjunction of certain objects, we reason in the following manner.  Such an object is 
always found to produce another.  ’Tis impossible it cou’d have this effect, if it was not endow’d 
with a power of production.  The power necessarily implies the effect; and therefore there is a just foundation for drawing a conclusion from the existence of one object to that of its usual attendant.    
                                                
32 In the Enquiry  Hume first presents an additional new argument (but one highly reminiscent of 
T88 and T163-5) designed to strengthen his claim that the uniformity of causal relations cannot be established a posteriori  by reason, on the ground that if it could be so established it would be knowable 
“upon one instance” and not (as we find) only “after a long course of uniform experiments” (E36 cf. E43).  The argument is a weak one, and Hume’s inability to imagine any kind of reasoning to which numbers of instances would be relevant illustrates his (historically unsurprising) poor grasp of 
probability theory. 59 
 The past production implies a power: The power implies a new production: And the new 
production is what we infer from the power and the past production. (T90) 
The Enquiry  version of this attempted justification of induction is subtly different, 
in that instead of apparently using the mere existence of a cause and effect relationship to infer the existence of a power, it takes for granted from the start that objects have powers and appeals to the constancy  of causal relations to infer a continuing 
“connexion between the sensible qualities and the secret powers” (E36).
33  But the 
forceful refutation that follows is equally decisive against either version: 
When a man says, I have found, in all past instances, such sensible qualities conjoined with such 
secret powers:  And when he says, similar sensible qualities will always be conjoined with similar 
secret powers ; he is not guilty of a tautology, nor are these propositions in any respect the same.  
You say that the one proposition is an inference from the other.  But you must confess, that the 
inference is not intuitive; neither is it demonstrative: Of what nature is it then?  To say it is 
experimental, is begging the question.  For all inferences from experience suppose, as their foundation, that the future will resemble the past, and that similar powers will be conjoined with similar sensible qualities. ... It is impossible, therefore, that any arguments from experience can prove this resemblance of the past to the future, since all these arguments are founded on the supposition of that resemblance. (E37-8 cf. T91) 
                                                
33 This difference is indeed minor, because Hume considers a similar move later in the Treatise  
version at T91 (“Shou’d it be said, that we have experience, that the same power continues united with the same object ...”), and he has anyway already explained at T87 that the very notion of causation 
involves constancy. 60 
 Here we clearly have a straightforward application of Hume’s central argument, rather 
than a significant independent addition to it.  This elegant refutation does, however, help to settle an important issue concerning the relationship between Hume’s reasoning about induction and his theory of causation. 
In the Treatise , as was mentioned in §1.2 above, Hume’s argument concerning 
induction is presented in the context of his analysis of causation.  This can give the 
impression that the one relies heavily on the other, and many books on Hume have tended to confirm this impression by treating the two together, often within the confines of a single chapter.  But the quotation just given shows clearly that Hume’s case against the rationality of induction is quite independent of his “regularity” analysis of causation, for even if causation is instead a matter of “secret powers” or “natural necessities”, and even if all observed A’s have in fact been endowed with the secret 
power to produce B, this in itself can give us no reason for supposing that some 
hitherto unobserved  A has been or will be similarly endowed.  The point is that because 
the connection between A and that power is not a priori , we can only justifiably infer a 
continued conjunction between them if we already have some justification for extrapolating from observed to unobserved.  So an analysis of causation in terms of “secret powers” or “natural necessities” provides no answer whatever to the inductive sceptic.
34 
                                                
34 Millican (1986) pp. 401-3 extends this line of thought by arguing that since the notion of natural 
necessity cannot even in principle legitimise induction, we can conclude that the notion itself is 
fundamentally incoherent.  For if A necessitates  B, then this should supply some explanatory account of 61 
 Since Hume’s views about induction do not depend on his own analysis of the 
notion of causation, this naturally raises the question of why that notion should nevertheless feature so prominently in his famous argument, and whether it plays any essential role there.  This question can only be straightforwardly addressed, however, in respect of the Enquiry , for in the Treatise  and Abstract  both the argument and its 
conclusion are explicitly presented as being fundamentally concerned with causal  
reasoning rather than with “probable reasoning” or “reasoning concerning matter of fact” (as observed in §1.2 above).  Focusing on the Enquiry , then, and appealing to the 
structural analysis developed above, we can see that causation features importantly in Hume’s argument at only two points: first, in Part i, where he uses it as a “middle term” for deducing that all probable reasoning is based on experience (propositions (1) to (6)); and secondly, at the beginning of Part ii (E33), where he appeals again to his earlier claim about our inability to perceive any connexion between objects’ powers and their sensible qualities (proposition (3)), and goes on to draw the corollary that the Uniformity Principle cannot be justified on the basis of such perception (proposition (9)).  Taking these two together, it seems that causation plays a role in Hume’s argument only to the extent of enabling him to conclude that inferences 
beyond the present testimony of our memory and senses (including inferences about the 
                                                                                                                                        
 
why B follows A, but a “necessity” which cannot ground an inference to B provides no such account, 
because even if such a necessity is operative the conjunction between A and B remains at bottom an 
unexplained coincidence (the coincidence that A is conjoined with the power to produce B ).  Hume 
himself famously maintains that the idea of necessity is incoherent as applied to external objects, since it is an idea derived from an internal impression (T160-6).  But the argument just given might provide him with a more reliable route to the same conclusion, because it does not in any way depend upon his 
dubious theory of ideas. 62 
 Uniformity Principle) cannot be drawn a priori from our immediate perceptions and 
hence must be based on past experience .  However this proposition seems just as 
plausible in its own right without any mention of causation, and it can moreover be supported directly by most of the examples, and much of the argumentation, that he provides in Part i. 
Hume’s argument, therefore, can apparently be reconstructed without any essential 
mention of causation.  And Hume himself might have welcomed such a reconstruction, for it would rid him of any dependence on his initial premise (1), about which he seems to have some doubts later in the Enquiry  when in Section X he turns his attention to 
inferences based on human testimony.  When these doubts arise, it is interesting and perhaps significant that he deals with them in exactly the way that would be required in order to permit such a reconstruction of his Section IV argument, for he makes no attempt to defend this premise, but instead simply remarks that it can be by-passed for his current purposes, on the grounds that any testimonial inference to the unobserved, even if it is admitted to be non-causal, must nevertheless be based on experience: 
This species of reasoning, perhaps, one may deny to be founded on the relation of cause and effect.  
I shall not dispute about a word.  It will be sufficient to observe, that our assurance in any argument of this kind is derived from no other principle than our observation of the veracity of human testimony, and of the usual conformity of facts to the reports of witnesses.  (E111) 
This remark is tantalising, but unfortunately we shall probably never know whether 
Hume ever noticed its relevance to his argument concerning induction. 63 
 Having completed his “coda”, and with it his abstract philosophical arguments for 
the thesis that probable inferences are not founded on reason, Hume ends Section IV with a relatively down-to-earth parting shot: 
It is certain, that the most ignorant and stupid peasants, nay infants, nay even brute beasts, improve 
by experience, and learn the qualities of natural objects, by observing the effects, which result from 
them. ... If you assert, therefore, that the understanding of [a] child is led [to draw conclusions about the future] by any process of argument or rationcination, I may justly require you to produce that argument ...  You cannot say, that the argument is abstruse, and may possibly escape your enquiry; since you confess, that it is obvious to the capacity of a mere infant.  If you hesitate, 
therefore, a moment, or if, after reflection, you produce any intricate or profound argument, you, in 
a manner, give up the question, and confess, that it is not reasoning which engages us to suppose the past resembling the future, and to expect similar effects from causes, which are, to appearance, similar.  This is the proposition which I intended to enforce in the present section. (E39) 
This is effective rhetoric, but its philosophical significance is less clear, for of course 
the inductive rationalist is unlikely to claim that infants base their expectations on reason.  Rather, he will concede that infants are supplied (by God, perhaps) with appropriate instincts which initially govern their thinking, but he will maintain that these instincts are, or can be, supplanted by reason as that faculty develops.  Hume’s parting shot, then, has little force unless it is supplemented by other considerations such as the desirability of a simple and uniform theory of all human and animal reasoning.  It is therefore worth noting that precisely this point is emphasised by Hume later in the Enquiry , in the important but relatively neglected Section IX, “Of the 
Reason of Animals” (itself a descendant of the similarly titled sixteenth and final section of Book I Part iii of the Treatise ). 64 
 4.3 The Complete Structure of Hume’s Argument 
We can now at last put together a complete structure diagram of Hume’s argument as it 
is presented in Section IV of the Enquiry (Figure1) .  The argument is quite complex, 
and so to assist in appreciating its large-scale structure, the same diagram is then shown shaded in such a way as to identify the main “logical blocks” of the argument and the sections of this thesis in which they have been discussed (Figure 1a) .  Finally, to make 
entirely transparent how the analysis is intended to correspond faithfully to Hume’s actual words, there is a table setting out, for each numbered proposition in the structure diagram, those precise passages of the Enquiry  text in which I have interpreted Hume 
as stating, more or less explicitly, that very proposition. 
The next three pages are repeated in Appendix 2 at the end of the thesis for easy 
reference, together with corresponding diagrams and table for the significantly different version of the argument as Hume initially presented it in the Treatise of 
Human Nature .  A brief comparison of the relevant diagrams should be sufficient to 
make clear some of the respects in which the Enquiry  version of the argument indeed 
represents a very considerable improvement, justifying both Hume’s revisions and our own predominant focus on the later work.  
Figure 1    Hume’s Argument Concerning Induction (from the Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding ) 65 (1) Only the relation of cause 
and effect can take us beyond the 
evidence of our memory and 
senses 
 
 
       
 
 
(7) All arguments from 
experience proceed upon the 
supposition that the future will be 
conformable to the past       
 
(2) All probable arguments 
(moral arguments, reasonings 
concerning matter of fact) are 
founded on the relation of cause 
and effect            
 
 
 
(4) Any effect is quite distinct 
from its cause, and many 
alternative effects are equally 
conceivable   
 
 
(6) All probable arguments 
(moral arguments, reasonings 
concerning matter of fact) are 
founded on experience  
(8) All probable arguments 
(moral arguments, reasonings 
concerning matter of fact) 
proceed upon the supposition that 
nature is uniform, and in 
particular, that similar causes 
will in the future have similar 
effects to those which they have 
had in the past [the Uniformity 
Principle or UP]   
 
 
  
(13) The contrary of UP can be 
distinctly conceived, and is 
therefore possible   
 
 
  
(12) All (good) reasonings are 
either demonstrative or moral 
(i.e. probable)  
(19)  CONCLUSION  
No probable argument (moral 
argument, reasoning concern-
ing matter of fact) is rational-
ly justified, and hence it is not 
reason [but instead custom or 
habit, a non-rational instinct] 
which engages us to make 
probable inferences 
 
(5) Causal relations cannot be 
known a priori , but can only be 
discovered by experience (of 
constant conjunctions)       
(14) There can be no (good) 
demonstrative argument for UP  
(15) If there is a good argument 
for UP, it must be probable only   
 
 
(3) The sensible qualities of objects do not 
reveal their causes or their effects, and there 
is no known connexion between an object’s 
sensible qualities and its “secret powers”    
 
(9) UP cannot be rationally 
justified by anything that we 
learn through the senses about 
objects’ “secret powers”   
(16) Any probable argument for 
UP would be circular  
(17) There is no good argument 
of any kind for UP   
  
 
(18) The Uniformity Principle 
cannot be rationally justified 
      
 
(10) UP is not intuitively certain   
(11) UP can only be rationally 
justified on the basis of a good 
argument (there must be a 
medium  for proving it)     66 
Figure 1a   The Main Logical Blocks of the Enquiry  Argument (as analysed in Sections 2.2 to 4.1) (1) Only the relation of cause 
and effect can take us beyond the 
evidence of our memory and 
senses 
 
        
 
 
(7) All arguments from 
experience proceed upon the 
supposition that the future will be 
conformable to the past       
 
 
  §2.2  (2) All probable arguments 
(moral arguments, reasonings 
concerning matter of fact) are 
founded on the relation of cause 
and effect    
 
  §2.3  
        
 
 
 
(4) Any effect is quite distinct 
from its cause, and many 
alternative effects are equally 
conceivable   
 
 
(6) All probable arguments 
(moral arguments, reasonings 
concerning matter of fact) are 
founded on experience  
(8) All probable arguments 
(moral arguments, reasonings 
concerning matter of fact) 
proceed upon the supposition that 
nature is uniform, and in 
particular, that similar causes 
will in the future have similar 
effects to those which they have 
had in the past [the Uniformity 
Principle or UP]   
 
      §3.2 
 
(13) The contrary of UP can be 
distinctly conceived, and is 
therefore possible   
 
  
 
(12) All (good) reasonings are 
either demonstrative or moral 
(i.e. probable)  
(19)  CONCLUSION  
No probable argument (moral 
argument, reasoning concern-
ing matter of fact) is rational-
ly justified, and hence it is not 
reason [but instead custom or 
habit, a non-rational instinct] 
which engages us to make 
probable inferences 
 
(5) Causal relations cannot be 
known a priori , but can only be 
discovered by experience (of 
constant conjunctions)       
(14) There can be no (good) 
demonstrative argument for UP  
(15) If there is a good argument 
for UP, it must be probable only   
 
 §4.1  
 
 
(3) The sensible qualities of objects do not 
reveal their causes or their effects, and there 
is no known connexion between an object’s 
sensible qualities and its “secret powers”    
 
(9) UP cannot be rationally 
justified by anything that we 
learn through the senses about 
objects’ “secret powers”   
(16) Any probable argument for 
UP would be circular  
(17) There is no good argument 
of any kind for UP   
 
 
 
(18) The Uniformity Principle 
cannot be rationally justified 
      §3.1   
 
(10) UP is not intuitively certain   
(11) UP can only be rationally 
justified on the basis of a good 
argument (there must be a 
medium  for proving it)      
Hume’s Statement of the Stages of the Enquiry  Argument  67 (1) E26: “By means of [ Cause and Effect ] alone can we go beyond the evidence of our memory and senses.” 
 
(2) E26: “All reasonings concerning matter of fact seem to be founded on the relation of Cause and Effect .” 
 E35: “all arguments concerning existence are founded on the relation of cause and effect” 
 E159: “all our evidence for any matter of fact, which lies beyond the testimony of sense or memory, is 
derived entirely from the relation of cause and effect” 
 
(3) E27: “No object ever discovers, by the qualities which appear to the senses, either the causes which 
produced it, or the effects which will arise from it” 
 E33: “It is allowed on all hands, that there is no known connexion between the sensible qualities and the 
secret powers” 
 
(4) E30: “every effect is a distinct event from its cause.  It could not, therefore, be discovered in the cause, and 
... the conjunction of it with the cause must appear ... arbitrary; since there are always many other effects, which, to reason, must seem fully as consistent and natural.” 
 
(5) E27: “the knowledge of [cause and effect] is not, in any instance, attained by reasonings à priori ; but arises 
entirely from experience” 
 E28: “ causes and effects are discoverable, not by reason, but by experience ” 
 E30: “In vain, therefore, should we pretend to ... infer any cause or effect, without the assistance of 
observation and experience.” 
 
(6) E27: “nor can our reason, unassisted by experience, ever draw any inference concerning real existence and 
matter of fact” 
 E30: “In vain, therefore, should we pretend to determine any single event ... without the assistance of 
observation and experience.” 
 
(7) E33: “we always presume, when we see like sensible qualities, that they have like secret powers, and 
expect, that effects, similar to those which we have experienced, will follow from them” 
 E35: “We have said, that ... all our experimental conclusions proceed upon the supposition, that the future 
will be conformable to the past” 
 E37: “all inferences from experience suppose, as their foundation, that the future will resemble the past, 
and that similar powers will be conjoi ned with similar sensible qualities” 
 
(8) E35: “We have said, that all arguments concerning existence are founded on the relation of cause and 
effect; that our knowledge of that relation is derived entirely from experience; and that all our experimental conclusions proceed upon the supposition, that the future will be conformable to the past.” 
 
(9) E33: “the mind is not led to form such a conclusion concerning [sensible qualities and secret powers’] 
constant and regular conjunction, by any thing which it knows of their nature”   (10) E34: “The connexion between these propos itions [ I have found that such an object has always been 
attended with such an effect  and I foresee, that other objects, which are, in appearance, similar, 
will be attended with similar effects ] is not intuitive.” 
 
(11) E34: “There is required a medium, which may enable the mind to draw such an inference, if indeed it be 
drawn by reasoning and argument.” 
 
(12) E35: “All reasonings may be divided into two kinds, namely demonstrative reasoning, or that concerning 
relations of ideas, and moral reasoning, or that concerning matter of fact and existence.” 
 
(13) E35: “it implies no contradiction, that the course of nature may change ... May I not clearly and 
distinctly conceive [such a thing]?” 
 
(14) E35: “That there are no demonstrative arguments in the case, seems evident” 
 E35: “whatever is intelligible, and can be distinctly conceived, implies no contradiction, and can never 
be proved false by any demonstrative argument or abstract reasoning à priori ” 
 
(15) E35: “If we be, therefore, engaged by arguments to put trust in past experience, and make it the standard 
of our future judgment, these arguments must be probable only, or such as regard matter of fact and real existence” 
 
(16) E35-6: “To endeavour, therefore, the proof [that the future will be conformable to the past] by probable 
arguments, or arguments regarding existence, must be evidently going in a circle, and taking that 
for granted, which is the very point in question.” 
 
(17) E35: “it may be requisite ... to shew, that none of [the branches of human knowledge] can afford such an 
argument” 
 E159: “we have no argument to convince us, that objects, which have, in our experience, been frequently 
conjoined, will likewise, in other instances, be conjoined in the same manner” 
 
(18) E39: “it is not reasoning which engages us to suppose the past resembling the future, and to expect 
similar effects from causes, which are, to appearance, similar” 
 E159: “nothing leads us to [expect constant conjunctions to continue] but custom or a certain instinct of 
our nature” 
 
(19) E32: “I say then, that, even after we have experience of the operations of cause and effect, our 
conclusions from that experience are not founded on reasoning, or any process of the 
understanding.” 
 E43: “All inferences from experience, therefore, are effects of custom, not of reasoning” 
 E46-7: “All belief of matter of fact or real existence [is due merely to] a species of natural instincts, which 
no reasoning or process of the thought and understanding is able, either to produce, or to prevent.”  68 
 69 
 Chapter 5   Stove’s Analysis and his 
Interpretation of Hume’s Conclusion 
5.1 Stove’s Structural Analysis and Hume’s Alleged 
Deductivism 
Now that we have a complete structure diagram of Hume’s argument, an important task 
is to highlight and justify its differences from the well-known rival structure diagram devised by Stove (1973), which serves as the foundation of his influential analysis and which according to him provides powerful evidence that Hume is a deductivist.  The two diagrams are in some respects hard to compare, because Stove focuses mainly on Hume’s argument as it appears in the Treatise  and Abstract  (but see Appendix 2 for my 
own diagram of the former), and he intends his diagram to be “a composite photograph” (p. 30) of all three versions.  So I shall here confine myself to relatively straightforward structural points whose relevance to both diagrams is obvious (using references such as “(8/e)” to signify a Humean proposition which in “translated” form is recognisably common to both).  Having criticised Stove’s diagram, I shall then go on to show how the structure of Hume’s argument, so far from indicating that Hume is a deductivist, in fact suggests quite the reverse. 70 
  Stove’s diagram is shown as Figure 2  on the following page, in a form which is 
intended to display clearly not only his initial analysis of Hume’s explicit argument structure, but also some important elaborations and interpretations of that structure which he develops in the course of his discussion. 
 Stove presents his structure diagram as a framework of letters, annotated by a 
separately listed “dictionary” identifying which proposition each letter represents.  He 
gives two such dictionaries, the first (p. 31) in Humean language, and the second (p. 45) “translated” into modern philosophical terminology.  To capture the spirit of both versions, whilst also endeavouring to making his diagram easier to follow, I have instead set out the propositions in boxes within the framework, generally preferring to follow his earlier Humean “dictionary” (in some cases slightly abbreviated) but adding his modernising “translations” in square brackets where these are particularly significant.  I have also added to the diagram the two alleged suppressed premises which Stove takes to be implicit in Hume’s argument, and the “fallibilist consequence” which is according to him the proper conclusion to be drawn from it – these three “unexpressed” propositions are distinguished here by shading.  Note that Stove’s own presentation of his diagram precedes this part of his analysis (pp. 46-50), and accordingly omits all three of these propositions – hence it does not contain what I have labelled (k), (l), (m) and their associated arrows, and instead represents proposition (j) as being inferred from (g) and (i) directly. 
 71 
 Stage 1      
 
(a)  Whatever is intelligible, is possible 
 
 
(b)  That any causal inference, prior to  
experience of the appropriate constant 
conjunction, should have its premise 
true and conclusion false, is an 
intelligible supposition    
(c)  That any causal inference, prior 
to experience of the appropriate 
constant conjunction, should have its 
premise true and conclusion false, is 
possible   
(d) Conclusion of 
Stage 1 
Any causal inference, prior to 
experience, is not one which reason 
engages us to make [i.e. all such 
inferences are unreasonable] 
     
 
 
Suppressed 
Premises  
 
   
(k)  There can be no demonstrative 
arguments [valid arguments from 
necessarily true premises] for a matter 
of fact [contingent proposition]   
(l) Deductivist 
Premise  
All (deductively) invalid arguments 
are unreasonable 
Stage 2      
 
(f)  The Uniformity Principle is a 
proposition concerning matter of fact  
and existence [i.e. UP is a contingent 
proposition] 
 
  
(h)  Any arguments for the Uniformity 
Principle must be probable ones 
 
 
(e)  Probable arguments all presuppose 
the Uniformity Principle [i.e. all 
inductive arguments are invalid as they 
stand, and are such that, in order to turn 
them into valid arguments, it is 
necessary to add UP to their premises]   
(g)  The Uniformity Principle cannot 
be proved by any demonstrative 
arguments [i.e. UP cannot be validly 
inferred from necessarily true 
premises] 
 
      
(i)  Any probable argument for the 
Uniformity Principle would be 
circular  (j) Sceptical 
Conclusion  
Even after  we have had experience of 
the appropriate constant conjunction, 
it is not reason (but custom, etc) 
which determines us to make causal 
inferences [i.e. all predictive-
inductive inferences are unreasonable] 
 
  
(m) Fallibilist 
Consequence  
All predictive-inductive inferences are 
invalid, and cannot be turned into 
valid arguments by the addition of 
further observational premises 
Figure 2   Hume’s argument according to Stove (1973)  72 
 Some of the objections to Stove’s analysis are relatively pedantic – for example, 
that he fails to distinguish consistently between Hume’s talk in the Treatise  and 
Abstract  of inferences “from the impression to the idea” (shortened to “causal 
inferences” in the diagram) and his subtly different talk of “probable reasoning” (which in those two versions is confined to the discussion of arguments for the Uniformity 
Principle).   Slightly more significant, perhaps, is that Stove completely misrepresents 
the logical role of proposition (h) as lying on the inferential route from (f) to (i), when in fact (i) clearly follows from (e) alone, and (h) should instead presumably lie between (g) and (m).  But the main objection to Stove’s diagram is his wholesale distortion of the overall structure of the argument in his effort to portray it as consisting of two independent stages: in fact, in all three versions Hume argues for (5/d) only as a means 
of establishing that causal/probable inferences must be based on experience, and he then goes on to use this result as means of arguing for (8/e) and hence for (19/j), his ultimate conclusion .
35  So Stove’s (d), which he represents as the conclusion of 
“Stage 1”, and his (e), which he represents as a premise of “Stage 2”, really both correspond to intermediate steps in Hume’s single and thoroughly integrated argument (whose integrated structure is further obscured in Stove’s diagram by his failure to indicate the pivotal role of (e) in inferring (j)/(m) from (g)/(h) and (i)). 
                                               
 
35 Passages making relatively explicit the inference from (5/d) to (8/e) are T87 “’Tis therefore ... 
past experience” and T88-9 “Since it appears ... uniformly the same”; A651 “It would have been ... 
uniformly the same”;  E35-6 “We have said ... point in question”. 73 
 If Hume’s argument does not in fact consist of two independent stages, then 
Stove’s interpretative procedure, of appealing to a supposed parallel between Hume’s reasoning for the alleged Stage 1 conclusion and his reasoning for the argument’s overall conclusion, is largely undermined (quite apart from the doubts expressed in §2.2 above concerning Stove’s interpretation of “Stage 1” itself).  And this is 
significant, because despite the length at which Stove has written on Hume’s argument, 
this two-stage analysis represents his only major item of evidence for Hume’s alleged deductivism which can purport to be grounded independently of other controversial aspects of his interpretation.  The other pieces of evidence on which he lays greatest weight (1965 pp. 205, 209-10; 1973 pp. 43-4) are his deductivist explication of Humean presupposition; his assertion that any circular argument must be valid and hence that at (16/i) Hume must have in mind only valid probable arguments; his explanation of why a deductivist Hume would reject an argument whose presupposition fails; and his general claim to have made sense of the structure of Hume’s reasoning.  But it is clear that all of these points are highly mutually dependent, and are therefore relatively easy to dismiss all together if a coherent alternative account is available.  If the arguments above (especially in §2.5 and §3.2) are correct, then there is indeed such an alternative account, and one that is very much more faithful to Hume.  Let us now therefore turn back to this account, and put to it the question which Stove puts to his own: does the analysis of Hume’s argument which it yields indicate that he is, or is not, a deductivist? 
There are at least two reasons why the argument structure represented in Figure 1  
is hard to square with the supposition that Hume was a deductivist.  First, it is 74 
 obviously a fairly complicated argument, which proceeds by carefully identifying a 
general presupposition of probable reasoning (8), and then systematically eliminating all the potential sources of rational support for this presupposition ((9), (10), (14) and (16)).  But if Hume were indeed a deductivist, then such a complicated structure would be entirely unnecessary, for a deductivist recognises only one degree of rational 
support, namely deductive certainty, and Hume is well aware that such certainty can be 
ruled out directly with his argument from distinct conceivability – he uses it himself for j u s t  t h i s  p u r p o s e  a t  s t a g e  ( 1 3 ) .   S t o v e ,  a s  w e  h a v e  s e e n  ( § 2 . 2 ) ,  i n t e r p r e t s  H u m e  a s  deploying another version of this argument earlier on, at stage (4).  But he completely fails to observe that a small adaptation of this version would have been quite sufficient to give a deductivist Hume a “hole in one”, reaching his final conclusion (19) with a minimum of effort: 
  (a) Whatever is intelligible, is possible. 
  (b) That any inference from observed to unobserved should have all its premises 
true and conclusion false, is an intelligible supposition. 
 Therefore (c) That supposition is possible.  And hence (d) No inference from observed to unobserved is one which reason engages us to 
make. 
It is hard to believe that an argument so straightforward, obvious, and Humean in spirit 
(cf. E164, D189) would have evaded the great sceptic’s scrutiny if it had been sufficient for his purpose. 75 
 The second reason for rejecting a deductivist interpretation of the argument in 
Figure 1  is related to the first, and concerns Hume’s procedure when examining the 
potential sources of inferential justification for the Uniformity Principle.  With proposition (12) he states that all reasonings are either demonstrative or probable, and he goes on to rule out each of these in turn as providing a possible rational basis for the 
Uniformity Principle.  But the crucial question is this: if Hume is a deductivist, and 
accordingly assumes from the start that only demonstrative reasonings are rational, then why does he even consider the possibility that probable reasoning might justify the Uniformity Principle?  From the point of view of a deductivist, a probable justification is no justification at all.  The fact that Hume is prepared to canvass such a justification, even though he of course ultimately rules it out on the grounds of circularity, very strongly suggests that he was no deductivist. 
5.2 Stove’s Probabilistic Interpretation of Hume’s 
Conclusion 
We have by now seen ample reason to reject Stove’s analysis of Hume’s argument, but 
this in itself does not imply that we can reject his formal interpretation of Hume’s conclusion, which he works out (1973 pp. 53-62) somewhat independently of his earlier analysis.  This interpretation has, moreover, provided the basis of a number of would-be “refutations of inductive scepticism” (e.g. Stove 1973 chapter 5, Stove 1986 chapter V, Gemes 1983), and is therefore worth considering in its own right.  Stove starts from the assumption (argued earlier in his book at pp. 33-4) that Hume’s 76 
 conclusion can be paraphrased as “All predictive-inductive inferences are 
unreasonable”, and he takes this to mean that in any predictive-inductive inference the premises (which concern observed objects) provide no support whatever for the conclusion (which concerns unobserved objects).  This claim Stove interprets as a probabilistic “judgement of irrelevance” (p. 59) – a judgement that the existence of 
“past” (i.e. observed) objects which satisfy some condition in no way affects the 
probabilility that “future” (i.e. unobserved) objects will also satisfy that condition.  If we restrict our attention to a particular condition, F, one past object, a, and one future 
object, b, then such a judgement of irrelevance of the past to the future (“IPF”) can be 
expressed formally as follows:
36 
 P( Fb/Fa)  =  P( Fb)           I P F  
That is, the probability that Fb is true given that Fa is true  is exactly the same as the 
initial probability that Fb is true  (the latter signifying the probability that Fb is true in 
advance of observing that Fa is true).  This indeed seems a reasonable way of 
expressing Hume’s “judgement of irrelevance” in probabilistic terms, if that is one’s aim.
37 
                                                
36 I have simplified Stove’s exposition here by omitting all references to “tautological” or other 
background evidence, so that for example the probability of Fb on tautological evidence (i.e. on the basis 
of no empirical evidence whatever) is shown as simply P( Fb). 
37 Particularly in view of the discussion in §3.2 above, which highlighted how Hume sees 
probability as essentially a posteriori , it must remain highly debatable whether he would have accepted 
the controversial notion of “logical probability” wh ich Stove here presupposes.  Nevertheless it is, I 
believe, worth seeing how far Hume’s position can be explicated within such a framework. 77 
 Stove however extends this interpretation by stating that Hume (although he 
“never discusses explicitly ... universal -inductive inferences”, p. 28) obviously 
“intended the sceptical conclusion which he drew about predictive-inductive inferences to be drawn also about universal-inductive ones” (p. 61).  Stove accordingly takes Hume’s conclusion about universal-inductive inferences to be also a simple judgement 
of irrelevance, and if we again restrict ourselves to our two-object universe, he takes 
this to have the implication that according to Hume the probability of the “universal” proposition ( Fa & Fb) is in no way affected by the observation of Fa.  Let us call this 
particular judgement of irrelevance “Hume’s Inductive Scepticism according to Stove”, or “HISS” for short. 
 P( Fa & Fb/Fa)  =  P( Fa & Fb)        H I S S  
Stove’s “refutation” of Hume involves a formal proof that where F is an empirical 
predicate which might or might not apply to each of the objects a and b individually, 
HISS has implications which are clearly unacceptable both to the inductivist and to the inductive sceptic.  This proof he dignifies with the name of “von Thun’s argument” (p. 68). 
Von Thun’s argument is unnecessarily complicated, extending over an entire page 
and using four “principles of logical probability” together with two inequality statements each of which asserts that some contingent proposition has initial probability less than 1.  Two of the principles used in the argument are the Equivalence Principle, which states “that logically equivalent propositions can be substituted for one another salva probabilitate  in statements and in principles of logical probability”, and 
the Conjunction Principle, which states that for any propositions q and r, 78 
 P(q & r) = P( q) × P(r/q).  There is in fact a much simpler way of showing that HISS is 
unacceptable to both inductivist and sceptic, in a mere three steps and using only these 
two principles: 
 P( Fa & Fb/Fa)  =  P( Fa & Fb)      H I S S  
    =  P( Fa & (Fa & Fb))   Equivalence Principle 
    =  P( Fa) × P(Fa & Fb/Fa)  Conjunction Principle 
∴ Either   P(Fa & Fb/Fa) = 0  or  P(Fa) = 1   Arithmetic 
To accept this conclusion would be to embrace either a wildly implausible counter-
inductivism, or an equally absurd claim to a priori  knowledge of the supposedly 
empirical proposition Fa.  So HISS is indeed refuted. 
The fact that HISS can be so easily refuted might prompt the suspicion that it is 
not after all a legitimate extension of the relatively innocuous IPF.  And this suspicion 
would be well-founded, for whereas IPF represents a judgement of irrelevance of a past proposition Fa to a purely future proposition Fb, HISS represents a far less plausible 
judgement of irrelevance, of a past proposition Fa to a past-and-future proposition ( Fa 
& Fb) which, so to speak, overlaps with Fa  (i.e. the truth of the “premise” Fa already 
implies that the “conclusion” ( Fa & Fb) is partially fulfilled).  Someone who accepts 
HISS is, for example, committed to saying that if I am playing backgammon and throw one of my two dice before the other, the proposition that the first die lands showing a 
“6” has no impact whatever on the probability of the proposition that after the second 
die has landed the two dice together will have shown two “6”s .  This is manifestly 
         79 
 absurd on any account, and is certainly not a logical extension of IPF as Stove appears 
to believe.  His only ground for viewing it in this way, as we have seen, is his claim 
that Hume “intended the sceptical conclusion which he drew about predictive-inductive inferences to be drawn also about universal-inductive ones”, but as an argument for a particular formal interpretation of Hume this is quite feeble.  For the judgement of 
irrelevance IPF instantiates more than one probabilistic schema, and it can therefore be 
generalised to other instances in more than one way.  Stove (p. 61) chooses to see it as an instance of the schema: 
 (S1) If E and H are such that the inference from E to H is inductive, then 
P(H/E) = P(H)  
But he gives no reason at all for preferring this very simplistic schema (which would 
however be significantly less simple when supplemented with a definition of “inductive”) to other possibilities, such as the only slightly more complicated: 
 (S2) If O and E logically imply no unobserved matter of fact, and H logically 
implies no observed matter of fact, then P(O & H/O & E) = P(H)  
This separates out the “observed” ( O) and “unobserved” ( H) components in the 
conclusion of any inductive argument, and reduces to Stove’s (S1) where O is merely 
tautologous: it thus indeed subsumes IPF (with O tautologous, E substituted by Fa and 
H substituted by Fb).  But in providing an assessment of the probability 
P(Fa & Fb/Fa), instead of yielding the preposterous result HISS it generates instead 80 
 (with O substituted by Fa, E tautologous and H substituted by Fb) the far more 
Humean: 
  P ( Fa & Fb/Fa) = P( Fb) 
It likewise generalises quite easily to all “predictive-inductive” and “universal-
inductive” arguments, enabling us to express “the same sceptical conclusion about all 
of them” without running into any obvious absurdities.  As a probabilistic schema of 
inductive scepticism it is vastly more plausible than Stove’s, for not only does it express quite straightforwardly the irrelevance of the observed to the unobserved – it is also, I believe, just as difficult to refute as inductive scepticism itself. 81 
 Chapter 6   Hume, Scepticism, and 
Reason 
6.1 Is Hume an Inductive Sceptic? 
Having now seen in §5.2 a relatively precise statement of what extreme inductive 
scepticism amounts to – namely the total evidential irrelevance of observed to unobserved – it is appropriate to ask whether this can properly be seen as the substance of Hume’s own conclusion, which he certainly expresses in apparently sceptical language: “... ’tis impossible for us to satisfy ourselves by our reason, why we shou’d extend ... experience beyond those particular instances, which have fallen under our observation.” (T91);  “our conclusions from ... experience are not founded on 
reasoning, or any process of the understanding” (E32).  Clearly too my above analysis of Hume’s famous argument suggests a sceptical reading, for it treats that argument as pivoting around the Uniformity Principle, which it takes to be essentially a statement of evidential relevance whose rational credentials are then examined and apparently found wanting.  Further seemingly strong textual support for the traditional sceptical interpretation extends well beyond the immediate context of the argument: 
Thus all probable reasoning is nothing but a species of sensation ... When I give the preference to 
one set of arguments above another, I do nothing but decide from my feeling concerning the 
superiority of their influence. (T103) 82 
 even after the observation of the frequent or constant conjunction of objects, we have no reason to 
draw any inference concerning any object beyond those of which we have had experience   (T139) 
nothing leads us to this inference but custom or a certain instinct of our nature; which it is indeed 
difficult to resist, but which, like other instincts, may be fallacious and deceitful.  (E159) 
we cannot give a satisfactory reason, why we believe, after a thousand experiments, that a stone 
will fall, or fire burn  (E162) 
The problem is that this extreme scepticism seems incompatible not only with a 
significant number of statements in favour of experimental reasoning that Hume makes in many different places, but also with the structure and logic of several important arguments in the Treatise  and Enquiry , and even more fundamentally,  with the general 
thrust of his empiricist philosophical project.  Here first are some quotations that are at least problematic for the traditional interpretation: 
We infer a cause immediately from its effect; and this inference is not only a true species of 
reasoning, but the strongest of all others  (T96n) 
One who concludes somebody to be near him, when he hears an articulate voice in the dark, 
reasons justly and naturally; tho’ that conclusion be deriv’d from nothing but custom  (T225) 
One, who in our climate, should expect better weather in any week of J UNE than in one of 
DECEMBER , would reason justly, and conformably to experience ... A wise man ... proportions his 
belief to the evidence.  (E110) 83 
 The last of these is from Section X of the Enquiry , an essay whose entire argument 
centres on the principle that probable reasonings, and in particular those from testimony, can vary in force, implying that they are not all worthless: “the evidence, resulting from ... testimony, admits of a diminution, greater or less, in proportion as the fact is more or less unusual.” (E113).  Likewise in the Treatise  another of Hume’s most 
notorious arguments, concerning “scepticism with regard to reason” (I iv 1), depends 
completely on the idea that the force of a probable argument can diminish by gradual degrees (T181-3), while in both works Hume’s discussions of “the probability of chances” and “the probability of causes” ( Treatise  I iii 11-12, Enquiry  VI) apparently 
presuppose that probable arguments can be less than certain though st ill in some sense 
respectable.  The evidence of these special discussions of probability is admittedly somewhat equivocal, for it is arguable (cf. Stove 1973 p. 120) that Hume’s primary purpose in these sections is simply to explain psychologically why “philosophers” judge probable arguments as they do, rather than himself to endorse those judgements.
38  And perhaps a similar dismissal could even be given of Treatise  I iii 15, 
where Hume presents his “rules by which to judge of causes and effects” which purport to distinguish between good and bad probable reasonings.  However those who take Hume himself to believe that probable arguments cannot genuinely  vary in force will 
have more difficulty explaining away the contrast between demonstrations and 
                                               
 
38 Hume’s detached language at the beginning of Treatise  I iii 13, “Of unphilosophical 
probability”, provides at least a hint that he is here explaining the opinions of others rather than expounding his own: “All these kinds of probability are r eceiv’d by philosophers, and allow’d to be 
reasonable foundations of belief and opinion.  But there are others, that are deriv’d from the same 
principles, tho’ they have not had the good fortune to obtain the same sanction.”  (T143) 84 
 probabilities which he draws quite explicitly at T31, clearly speaking in propria 
persona : 
’Tis not in demonstrations as in probabilities, that difficulties can take place, and one argument 
counter-ballance another, and diminish its authority.  A demonstration, if just, admits of no 
opposite difficulty; and if not just, ’tis a mere sophism, and consequently can never be a difficulty.  ’Tis either irresistible, or has no manner of force. 
It is likewise hard to deny that Hume is in earnest when he advocates in the very 
subtitle of the Treatise  the introduction of “the experimental method of reasoning into 
moral subjects” (Txi), or when he proceeds to apply this method himself not only in the Treatise  but also in particular in Enquiry  X and XI and in the Dialogues , where he 
vigorously attacks natural theologians for failing to “proportion their belief” to the empirical  evidence. 
We are thus faced with a major interpretative puzzle.  For on the one hand Hume 
argues, forcefully and repeatedly, that “we have no reason” whatever to make inductive inferences; while on the other he continues to make such inferences himself, treats them as varying in force, presents rules for assessing them, describes some as “just” and “true”, and criticises natural theologians and others (including “the vulgar”) for failing to conform to the appropriate standards.  This inconsistency, it should be noted, is far more problematic than the superficially similar inconsistencies that Hume famously admits to when he acknowledges his psychological inability to relinquish various other rationally unwarranted beliefs (e.g. T187, 218, 265-70).  If a simple            85 
 conflict between reason and belief were the only problem, then his complete answer 
would be clear and straightforward: 
Nature, by an absolute and uncontroulable necessity has determin’d us to judge as well as to 
breathe and feel; nor can we any more forbear viewing certain objects in a stronger and fuller light, 
upon account of their customary connexion with a present impression, than we can hinder ourselves from thinking as long as we are awake, or seeing the surrounding bodies, when we turn our eyes towards them in bright sunshine.  (T183 cf. E46-7) 
But although such an appeal to natural weakness can indeed explain, and even 
pragmatically justify, our continuing to make irrational inferences and to infer unwarranted beliefs, it is hard to see how it can provide any basis for the sort of normative  claim that Hume makes about these supposedly irrational inferences: that we 
ought  to adhere to a particular set of rules when making them, or that those which are 
made in accordance with these rules are somehow better  than others.  Surely such 
normative claims require that the “superior” inferences have more than mere psychological compulsion to recommend them – that they be, at least to a minimal extent, and in some sense, rationally well-founded .  The only way that Hume can 
maintain a consistent position, therefore, is to acknowledge a species of rationality distinct from that which he denies to inductive inferences. Fortunately, he does just this; but regrettably, the account which he provides of it is extremely sketchy and unclear. 86 
 6.2 Three Senses of “Reason” 
Hume’s use of the faculty term “reason”, and of what seems (judging by his use of it) 
to be a synonym, “the understanding”, can seem frustratingly inconsistent.  Sometimes, as in the title of the Enquiry  and of Book I of the Treatise , and of the section in each 
work which discusses “the reason of animals”, he uses them to speak neutrally and naturalistically of “the reasoning faculty of brutes, as well as that of human creatures” (T176) – in this sense reason is the faculty whose role is to ascertain truth and falsehood (T415-6, 458), but it can nevertheless be “deceitful” (T180), “fallacious” (E55), “weak” (T182, E72, 76, 158), “infirm” (E161), and even “blundering” (T587). 
At other times, most notably in the argument concerning induction itself but also 
elsewhere (e.g. T212, E138), Hume uses the two terms in a significantly different way (or ways), for here he takes them to refer to a faculty whose operations are guaranteed to be in some sense reliable, so that beliefs or inferences whose credentials are defective can confidently be ascribed to a different source: “This sentiment, then, as it is entirely unreasonable, must proceed from some other faculty than the understanding” (T193); “’tis a false opinion ... and consequently ... can never arise from reason” (T209).  Typically in these cases, it is the imagination (“the fancy”) which is attributed with the questionable beliefs and inferences – indeed Hume here seems to treat the attribution of a belief or inference to the imagination (or to “custom”, which acts on the imagination – E48, 106) as virtually equivalent to the statement that it is in some way rationally defective. 87 
 Given this explicit contrast between reason and the imagination, it is somewhat 
surprising to find Hume apparently identifying the two faculties as one and the same: “the understanding or imagination can draw inferences from past experience” (T104).  Nor is this an isolated anomaly, for Hume repeatedly attributes inferences from experience to “reason” or “the understanding” even though he has previously, and 
emphatically, established in his famous argument that any such inference is drawn by 
the imagination and “proceeds not from reason” (E54)!  The following quotation, for example, seems dubiously consistent with the conclusion of the argument concerning induction: 
It has been observ’d, that reason, in a strict and philosophical sense, can have an influence on our 
conduct after only two ways: Either when it excites a passion by informing us of the existence of something which is a proper object of it; or when it discovers the connexion of causes and effects, so as to afford us means ... (T459, cf. T414, ME285) 
It might be supposed that Hume (despite his use of the word “strict”) has here reverted 
from what we can call the “rigorous” sense of “reason” employed in his famous argument to the neutral sense in which it encompasses all “reasonings” no matter what their rational credentials.  But in fact he appears to be using the term in a sense intermediate between his neutral and his rigorous senses:
39 
                                                
39 By suggesting a three-way ambiguity I here go further than Barbara Winters (1979), who 
importantly argued that Hume uses the term “reason” in (at least) two main senses (a view that later became very fashionable, as alluded to in §2.4 above).  Note that in addition to the three senses discussed here, Hume also points out (or uses himself) various “improper” senses, which add to the potential for 
confusion: e.g. T414-8, 437-8, 536, 546, 583, E43n, ME239. 88 
 In general we may observe, that as our assent to all probable reasonings is founded on the vivacity 
of ideas, it resembles many of those whimsies and prejudices, which are rejected under the 
opprobrious character of being the offspring of the imagination.  By this expression it appears that the word, imagination, is commonly us’d in two different senses; and tho’ nothing be more contrary to true philosophy, than this inaccuracy, yet in the following reasonings I have often been oblig’d to fall into it.  When I oppose the imagination to the memory, I mean the faculty, by which we form 
our fainter ideas.  When I oppose it to reason, I mean the same faculty, excluding only our 
demonstrative and probable reasonings.  (T117n) 
This footnote, which expands on the note at T371n, was specially inserted by Hume 
while the Treatise  was going through the press – hence some copies of the first edition 
of Book I include it, while others do not.  That it carries such emphatic authority is fortunate, because it indeed seems to provide an important clue as to what is going on.  Although Hume has argued that probable inferences are ultimately founded on the imagination rather than on reason (in the rigorous sense), he is reluctant to see such inferences tarred with the same brush as the “whimsies and prejudices” that are considered to be the imagination’s more typical offspring.  He accordingly defines a restricted  sense of “the imagination”, according to which that faculty includes only the 
epistemologically less respectable mental operations, and this restriction implies that probable reasoning must be relocated instead into the province of the understanding, whose scope is thereby extended .  Hume does not quite explicitly acknowledge this 
implication from a restriction of the one faculty to an extension of the other, but he nevertheless plainly endorses it, for the very same sentence which spells out the restricted sense of “imagination” begins by making clear that its whole point is to “oppose [the imagination] to reason”.  The upshot of all this is that Hume has implicitly specified a third sense of “reason” intermediate between the neutral and rigorous 89 
 senses, which includes within its domain both demonstrative and probable inference, 
but excludes the less respectable operations of the mind that he elsewhere describes as “deceitful”, “fallacious”, and “blundering”.  In this new intermediate sense, therefore, “the understanding” overlaps with what he had previously called “the imagination”, and might even be totally contained within it given that in the Treatise  at least, all 
reasonings whatever are found to depend ultimately on the vivacity of ideas (T96n, 
140, 184, 265-8).  Hence having inserted his clarificatory footnote Hume can speak somewhat misleadingly, but now without blatant self-contradiction, of “the understanding, that is, ... the general and more establish’d properties of the imagination”  (T267). 
This new intermediate sense of “reason” provides the resolution of our puzzle 
regarding Hume’s apparently ambivalent attitude towards induction, for it is in this sense that he unequivocally takes (suitably disciplined) probable inferences to be entirely rational.  But this superficially non-sceptical position seems completely insubstantial if its only basis is a stipulative extension of the concept of reason: it is hard to see how such a redefinition can provide the normativity that we have seen Hume requires for his critical enterprise of distinguishing between good and bad reasoning, and between science and superstition.  His apparent attempt at a persuasive definition seems, so far, to be entirely arbitrary – having discovered that probable (and maybe even demonstrative) reasoning is in fact the product of the imagination, he has chosen to dignify this particular operation of the imagination rather than others with the   90 
 honorific term “reason”, but has not apparently provided any good grounds for drawing 
such a distinction amongst those operations. 
Hume addresses this difficulty most directly in the Treatise , immediately after the 
section in which he has criticised “the antient philosophy” for being founded on “every trivial propensity of the imagination” (T224). 
But here it may be objected, that the imagination, according to my own confession, being the 
ultimate judge of all systems of philosophy, I am unjust in blaming the antient philosophers for makeing use of that faculty, and allowing themselves to be entirely guided by it in their reasonings.  In order to justify myself, I must distinguish in the imagination betwixt the principles which are permanent, irresistable, and universal; such as the customary transition from causes to effects, and from effects to causes: And the principles, which are changeable, weak, and irregular; such as those 
I have just now taken notice of.  The former are the foundation of all our thoughts and actions, so 
that upon their removal human nature must immediately perish and go to ruin.  The latter are neither unavoidable to mankind, nor necessary, or so much as useful in the conduct of life; but on the contrary are observ’d only to take place in weak minds, and being opposite to the other principles of custom and reasoning, may easily be subverted by a due contrast and opposition.  For this reason the former are received by philosophy, and the latter rejected.  (T225) 
Assuming that the ancient philosopher’s theory is not actually self-contradictory, it 
cannot be refuted purely by an appeal to reason in the rigorous sense.  But this does not mean that any judgement of it must be arbitrary, since even the principles of the ancient philosopher’s own imagination will include causal reasoning and induction.  These are unavoidable, universal and irresistable, so if his theory of “ sympathies, antipathies, and 
horrors of a vacuum ” (T224) or whatever yields conclusions that conflict with the 
          91 
 results of causal reasoning, then the principles on which he founds this theory can be 
“subverted by a due contrast and opposition”.  Even the ancient philosopher ought to be consistent, so the universality of causal reasoning enables us to condemn him out of his own mouth. 
We should note that it is not primarily the ancient philosopher’s theory  which is 
subverted by its conflict with natural causal reasoning, but rather the principles  on 
which that theory is founded.  It is this that grounds Hume’s demarcation amongst the operations of the imagination, and hence gives him a weapon not only against those theories which directly contradict the results of causal reasoning, but also against any other theories which may be founded on similar principles.  We can see the sketch of a systematic investigation into the various belief-forming operations of the imagination in Sections 9 to 13 of the Treatise  Book I Part iii, although Hume’s central concern in 
these sections seems to be with psychological explanation and corroboration of his theory of belief rather than with normative demarcation.  In Section 9, “Of the effects of other relations and other habits”, he discusses operations that are dependent on resemblance and contiguity, the non-causal associative principles, and he criticises caprice, credulity, “education” (indoctrination) and so on as means of forming beliefs because they so often lead us astray.  He then turns his attention to causal reasoning, first outlining in Sections 11 (“Of the probability of chances”) and 12 (“Of the probability of causes”) those reliable methods of causal reasoning which “are receiv’d by philosophers” (T143), and then going on in Section 13 (“Of unphilosophical probability”) to describe the various unreliable methods which are not “receiv’d”.  Again his objection to the “unphilosophical” principles (judging only be the recent and 92 
 near, prejudice, self-deception) is that they regularly lead us astray, and so to avoid 
inconsistencies in our causal reasonings he recommends that we make systematic and critical use of general rules  (T149), not in a way that encourages prejudice, but instead 
in a way that enables them to be modified, to take account of exceptions as they arise, in a logical and methodical manner.  The appropriate “logic” (T175) is given by his 
“rules by which to judge of causes and effects”, which he spells out later in Section 15. 
Hume thus has the basis for a naturalistic account of his intermediate sense of 
“reason”, according to which beliefs and methods of inference count as reasonable if they have a place within a consistent and systematic rule-governed framework dominated by the “permanent, irresistable, and universal” principles of the imagination, and in particular by the fundamental belief in inductive uniformity and the rules by which to judge of causes and effects which systematise its implications.  Hume can, of course, give no independent justification for this fundamental belief itself, but fortunately its inevitability entails that none is needed.  The difference between “the wise” and “the vulgar”, therefore, or between “philosophers” and the superstitious, lies not in the reasonableness of their belief in uniformity, but only in how systematically they pursue its consequences: “philosophical decisions are nothing but the reflections of common life, methodized and corrected.” (E162).  Crucially, however, this seems to be just enough for Hume’s critical purposes, because systematic consistency can be assessed by reason in the rigorous sense, and thus provides a non-circular and non-arbitrary norm of “rationality” in this looser sense.  But why should anyone care about consistency with an unfounded belief?  Hume’s answer seems to be that we are naturally motivated by curiosity or “the love of truth” (T448), which achieves some 93 
 satisfaction from the working out of a systematic theory, and which is understandably 
focused by our inevitable assumption that the world is, truly, uniform. 
In the Treatise , this tidy and relatively comfortable position is unfortunately not 
maintained, because Hume finds to his dismay that his distinction between the “permanent, irresistable, and universal” properties of the imagination and those that are 
“changeable, weak, and irregular” breaks down under examination, as only the latter 
can provide an escape from his otherwise all-consuming “scepticism with regard to reason”: 
[If we] take a resolution to reject all the trivial suggestions of the fancy, and adhere to the 
understanding, that is, to the general and more establish’d properties of the imagination; even this resolution, if steadily executed, wou’d be dangerous, and attended with the most fatal consequences.  For I have already shewn, that the understanding, when it acts alone, and according to its most general principles, entirely subverts itself, and leaves not the lowest degree of evidence in any proposition, either in philosophy or common life. (T267-8) 
In the Enquiry  and the Dialogues , by contrast, this extreme scepticism makes no 
significant appearance,40 leaving Hume with a far more satisfactory position in which 
he can combine the result of his argument concerning induction with a healthy respect for good, systematic, scientific inductive reasoning: 
                                               
 
40 In the Enquiry  Hume dismisses extreme “antecedent” scepticism (E149-50) on the 
straightforward ground that such  thoroughgoing Cartesian doubt about one’s own faculties would be 
paralysingly incurable.  He also somewhat downplays his sceptical arguments regarding the external world (E151-5), which in the Treatise  (T187-218, 226-31, 265-6) raise additional serious difficulties 
about the consistency of the “general and more establish’d properties of the imagination”. 94 
 To whatever length any one may push his speculative principles of scepticism, he must act, I own, 
and live, and converse like other men; and for this conduct he is not obliged to give any other 
reason than the absolute necessity he lies under of so doing.  If he ever carries his speculations farther than this necessity constrains him, and philosophises, either on natural or moral subjects, he is allured by a certain pleasure and satisfaction, which he finds in employing himself after that manner.  He considers besides, that every one, even in common life, is constrained to have more or 
less of this philosophy; that from our earliest infancy we make continual advances in forming more 
general principles of conduct and reasoning; that the larger experience we acquire, and the stronger reason we are endowed with, we always render our principles the more general and comprehensive; and that what we call philosophy  is nothing but a more regular and methodical operation of the 
same kind.  To philosophise upon such subjects is nothing essentially different from reasoning on common life; and we may only expect greater stability, if not greater truth, from our philosophy, on 
account of its exacter and more scrupulous method of proceeding.  (D134) 
It is a great shame that Hume said little, in his later works, on the demarcation between 
good and bad reasoning.  But these hints (and others) in Part I of the Dialogues , and in 
Part XII of the Enquiry  (e.g. E162), are enough to indicate the outlines of a mitigated 
scepticism that is well worth taking seriously, and whose power in distinguishing “science” from “superstition” is elegantly illustrated by his own deployment of it in his attacks on natural theology.  After the Treatise , apparently, Hume preferred using his 
tools to sharpening them. 95 
 6.3 “Reason” in the Argument Concerning 
Induction 
Although we are now relatively clear on the sense in which Hume believes induction to 
be “reasonable”, a little more needs to be said on the sense in which he does not.  In particular, we must ask whether the rigorous sense of reason which he employs in his famous argument is of wider significance, or whether it is simply a straw-man “rationalist” sense of reason, invoked only for the purpose of showing how utterly impotent it is, so that such rationalism can thereby be reduced to absurdity.  The latter position has been most prominently maintained by Beauchamp, Mappes and Rosenberg (1975, 1981), who can perhaps largely be credited with having brought about the now widespread recognition that Hume’s attitude to “reason” elsewhere in his writings is by no means obviously sceptical.  Since they wrote, several others (Arnold 1983, Broughton 1983, Baier 1991) have taken a broadly similar approach to Hume’s argument, and the points made below would apply with small variations to all of these. 
According to Beauchamp et al, Hume in his argument concerning induction has no 
intention of drawing a sceptical conclusion, but is “merely concerned to show that inductive reasoning cannot provide the logical necessity which uniquely characterizes demonstrative reasoning ( a priori  reasoning) and that demonstrative reasoning cannot 
from its own resources alone prove matters of fact”.  The argument is thus “a frontal attack on rationalist assumptions which encourage the view that at least some inductive arguments are demonstrative ” (1975 pp. 119, 121 cf. 1981 pp. 37, 41).  On 
 96 
 this interpretation, therefore, Hume’s rigorous sense of reason is a purely a priori  
demonstrative sense, and is adopted only in order to be dismissed. 
There are two main difficulties for this sort of interpretation, both of which we 
have encountered before.  First, we saw in §5.1 that the argument concerning induction is hard to make sense of in deductivist terms, and this point applies just as much 
whether or not the sense of “reason” to which it appeals is supposed to be genuinely 
Humean.  To repeat: if evidence must be demonstrative to count here as legitimate, then it is incomprehensible that Hume should use such a complicated argument structure to prove the lack of such evidence for the Uniformity Principle, and particularly odd that he should canvass the possibility of a “probable” justification for it.  This difficulty can only be increased if the appropriate sense of “reason” is supposed to be a priori  as well as demonstrative, because before canvassing his 
probable justification, Hume has already argued quite explicitly (stage (6) of the argument) that probable reasoning cannot be a priori . 
The second main difficulty for any “anti-rationalist” interpretation of Hume’s 
argument concerns the strong language which he uses to express its conclusion. Hume consistently says that we have no good (e.g. non-circular) reason whatever  to believe 
the Uniformity Principle, and he never qualifies this denial by suggesting that it relates only to some limited notion of “reason”.  We have seen in §6.1 some of the most explicit statements of his position, but the quotation from T139 is worth repeating in context: 97 
 Let men be once fully perswaded of these two principles, That there is nothing in any object, 
consider’d in itself, which can afford us a reason for drawing a conclusion beyond it;  and, That 
even after the observation of the frequent or constant conjunction of objects, we have no reason to draw any inference concerning any object beyond those of which we have had experience;  I say, let 
men be once fully convinc’d of these two principles, and this will throw them so loose from all common systems, that they will make no difficulty of r eceiving any, which may appear the most 
extraordinary. 
If Hume’s ambitions had been limited to refuting a priori  demonstrativist rationalism, 
then he could not have spoken in these terms.  For the denial of such rationalism amounts only to inductive fallibilism, and the Lockean orthodoxy was already unambiguously fallibilist: “most of the Propositions we think, reason, discourse, nay act upon, are such, as we cannot have undoubted Knowledge of their Truth” (Locke 1690 IV xv 2, cf. IV iii 9-17, 21-29; IV vi 7-16). 
So what exactly is it about Hume’s conclusion that is supposed to “throw men so 
loose from all common systems”?  As we saw in §4.1 above, this conclusion can be elucidated as the claim that in all probable reasonings, “there is a step taken by the mind, which is not supported by any argument or process of the understanding” (E41).  So what we seek is an interpretation of “the understanding” which would make this at the same time a legitimate implication of Hume’s argument, and also a sufficiently radical result to upset the fallibilist Lockean orthodoxy.  The obvious place to look is Locke’s own discussion of reason and its role in probable inference. 
We have already seen (in §2.5 above) the definition with which Locke begins the 
chapter “Of Probability” in Book IV of his Essay .  At the end of this chapter he makes 98 
 clear that he views probability so defined as an objective matter, for depending on the 
evidence that we have for it “so is any Proposition in it self, more or less probable” (IV xv 6 cf. IV xx 5).  Forming a “right Judgment” about such propositions is therefore “to proportion the Assent  to the different Evidence and Probability of the thing” (IV xvi 
9 cf. IV xvii 16).  The faculty whose role is to “discover” probability “is that which we 
call Reason.  For as Reason perceives the necessary, and indubitable connexion of all 
the Ideas  or Proofs one to another, in each step of any Demonstration ... so it likewise 
perceives the probable connexion of all the Ideas  or P r o of s  on e  to a n o th e r, i n  ev e ry  
step of a Discourse, to which it will think Assent due” (IV xvii 2).  Locke is no narrow Cartesian rationalist – he sees fallible probable inference as falling within the province of reason just as legitimately as does demonstration, and for him, as for Hume, the belief resulting from such inference is typically quite involuntary: “we cannot hinder ... our Assent, where the Probability manifestly appears upon due Consideration of all the Measures of it ... a Man can no more avoid assenting, or taking it to be true, where he perceives the greater Probability” (IV xx 16). 
Despite Locke’s fallibilism and his involuntarism, however, there is clearly an 
enormous gulf between his view of probable inference and Hume’s.  For Locke takes probabilities to be “perceived” by reason in a manner analogous to its perception of demonstrative relations, whereas Hume’s conclusion is that any probable argument involves a crucial step which even if it is admitted to be “reasonable” in some sense, cannot possibly be founded on rational perception but must be supplied instead by instinct.  This, then, is where Hume parts company not only with the extreme Cartesian rationalists, and with the modern “probabilists” such as Locke (and Leibniz – cf. 99 
 A646-7), but with an entire philosophical tradition stretching right back to the ancients.  
According to this tradition, reason is a special cognitive faculty separating man from the brutes, seen by many as a manifestation of the divine image (cf. Craig 1987 ch 1).  Its role is to facilitate belief not merely causally but intellectually, by yielding rational insight and real understanding either of the nature of things, or of the objective 
evidential relationships that hold between different states of affairs or propositions. 
The significance of Hume’s argument concerning induction, therefore, lies in its 
undermining of this broad and pervasive view of reason as a faculty of intellectual insight, by showing that any such faculty would be quite unable to “assure us of any ... matter of fact, beyond the present testimony of our senses, or the records of our memory” (E26).  The notion of reason whose inadequacy is thus revealed is not merely a narrow deductivist notion, but is wide enough to include any form of intellectual perception, whether that be derived purely from intuition and demonstration (as an extreme rationalist might insist), or from the senses and probability (as Locke and Leibniz would allow).  Hume proceeds by considering each of these four potential sources in turn (at stages (10), (14), (9), and (16) respectively), maintaining that none of them can provide any intellectual ground for that extrapolation from observed to unobserved which is necessary to draw warranted conclusions about “absent” matters of fact.  Thus by default, the true foundation of such extrapolation is revealed to be an animal instinct, showing that in this crucial respect man is closer to the beasts than to the angels.  But Hume does not end on a purely sceptical note – instead he extends the notion of reason (most clearly in that remarkable footnote at T117n) to accommodate      100 
 inferences drawn from this essential and fundamental instinct, and indeed makes 
consistency with it the very criterion of scientific reasonableness.  In this paradoxical manner, an argument with a truly disturbing sceptical conclusion – that we can 
perceive no reason whatever to justify any inference from observed to unobserved  – 
becomes the bridge to a critical but optimistic empiricism, which while committing to 
the flames the “sophistry and illusion” of “divinity and school metaphysics” (E165) is 
able to leave unscathed “the proper subjects of science and enquiry” (E163). 
____________________ 101 
 PART II 
 
Probabilistic Reasoning 
as an Answer to Hume  102 
 103 
 Chapter 7   Introduction: 
Strategies for Refuting Hume 
7.1 The Shape of Part II 
Having established in Part I of this thesis (as in Millican 1995) what I hope is a reliable 
interpretation of Hume’s famous argument concerning induction, the aim of this second part is to investigate the prospects for a successful refutation or circumvention of that argument.  In this chapter, accordingly, I shall start by briefly reviewing the three major non-probabilistic approaches that have traditionally been seen as possible means of countering so-called “Humean scepticism” by providing some sort of justifi-cation of induction.  However we shall soon discover as a result of this examination that none of these has any real prospect of refuting what has been identified in Part I as the genuine Humean position.  This being so, the a priori  probabilistic strategy, anticipated 
in §3.2 as a means of steering through the one clear gap that I identified in Hume’s argument, remains as the only serious contender still standing. 
In the following chapter I shall go on to discuss this probabilistic strategy in more 
depth, and in particular will consider how it might be differently developed in the light of the various possible interpretations of the concept of probability.  It is no part of this project to address the long-running debate between these interpretations, and since the point of our investigation is to examine the possibilities for a refutation of Hume, it 104 
 would obviously be inappropriate here to take for granted that the debate might be 
settled in favour of an interpretation that would render any such refutation a non-starter.  For this and analogous reasons, that chapter ends by spelling out some assumptions that will inform  the remainder of Part II – here the general intention is to give the opponent of Hume everything that he could reasonably ask for in his quest for 
a probabilistic refutation: a favourable interpretation of probability; a plausible form of 
the Principle of Indifference as an a priori  method of assessing initial probabilities in 
cases where this does not lead to inconsistency; even a solution to Goodman’s notorious paradox.  Though personally uncertain whether any of these concessions are 
genuinely deserved, they are given to the anti-Humean for the sake of the argument, in order to render the conclusion of Part II as strong as possible.  If the path to a possible justification of induction looks exceedingly narrow even after all these concessions have been permitted (and it does), then this will display very clearly the magnitude of the task that faces the would-be refuter of Hume. 
Chapter 9 moves on to discuss the fundamental principles of the theory of 
probability, based on Harold Jeffreys’ axiomatic presentation from the “Logical Relation” perspective.  In Chapter 10, armed with this technical background, the main business of Part II begins, with an examination and ultimate refutation of various would-be justifications of induction (notably those of De Finetti and Williams) that are based on the idea of predicting the individual probability of future events.  Chapters 11 to 13 then explore an alternative and perhaps more promising avenue, based on the prediction of continuing general uniformity – here I discuss the arguments of Mackie, Harrod, and Blackburn, before ending by proposing one of my own which, though I 105 
 have no great confidence in its success, may provide the last remaining forlorn hope of 
a probabilistic justification of induction. 
It is now time to begin our discussion by sketching the three main non-
probabilistic approaches to the justification of induction that have dominated the contemporary debate:
41  the “inductive”, the “analytic”, and the “pragmatic”.  Having 
reviewed their main features and some standard objections from a conventional 
perspective, we shall then briefly re-examine them in the light of our previous analysis of Hume’s own position, and will find that they all resoundingly fail to refute him. 
7.2 The Inductive Justification 
The inductive  defence of induction is based on the obvious (if apparently naive) idea 
that induction can be shown to be a reliable method of inference by appeal to its past success.  Of course the instant retort of the Humean will be that such a procedure is viciously circular – induction just is  the method of making inferences about the future 
based on the supposition that it will conform to the past, so to assume that it is 
                                               
 
41 So we shall not discuss, for example, Kantian attempts to justify induction on the basis of 
supposedly synthetic a priori  principles.  Quite apart from any other problems, the Kantian transcend-
ental perspective is essentially backward-looking: we know that the world is conditioned in such and such a way because we have (i.e. have had ) experience of such and such a type.  Even if this sort of 
argument could be epistemologically useful on its own terms, which I doubt, still nothing (apart perhaps from God or a dogmatic slumber) protects the Kantian from the prospect of an imminent descent into 
chaos in which such experience suddenly and unexpectedly becomes impossible. 106 
 legitimate to justify the future employment of this same method by appeal to its past 
success “must be evidently going in a circle, and taking that granted, which is the very point in question” (E36).  Max Black, the most tenacious proponent of this defence,
42 
has famously argued that the circle is not vicious, by appealing to the distinction between a premise  of an inference and a statement that the rule which governs the 
inference is reliable – according to Black, although the former cannot properly serve 
also as that same inference’s conclusion, on pain of deductive circularity, the latter can.  Hence he sees the following argument as providing a legitimate (albeit limited) defence of induction: 
Let rule R be:  To argue from Most instances of A’s examined in a wide variety of conditions have 
been B  to (probably) The next A to be encountered will be B . 
In most instances of the use of R in arguments with true premises examined in a wide variety of 
conditions, R has been successful. 
  Hence (probably): In the next instance to be encountered of the use of R in an argument with a true premise, R will be 
successful. 
  (Black 1958, p. 128; 1963, p. 138) 
                                                
42 Here my imagination is inevitably enlivened by the witty definition, in The Philosophical 
Lexicon  (Dennett and Lambert, 1978) of “The Black Max” as a “coveted decoration, annually awarded 
to the philosopher who stays aloft the longest by flying in circles” (p. 2).  Another memorable definition relevant to our topic:  to “hume” a philosophical position is to commit it to the flames, bury it or otherwise destroy it – hence the wonderful verb “exhume” which, appropriately, means “to revive a 
position generally believed to be humed” (p. 6)! 107 
 However most commentators (e.g. Achinstein 1962, 1963; Kyburg 1964 pp. 260-1) 
seem to be unconvinced of Black’s claim to have avoided “reprehensible” circularity here, and we shall see later that their scepticism is amply warranted. 
7.3 The Analytic Justification 
The analytic  justification of induction can be viewed as a natural response to the 
perceived circularity of the inductive defence.  For Black’s argument does seem to invoke a supremely rational method of assessing any non-deductive rule of inference, namely on the basis of its past success, and if such a compelling method cannot itself be justified by this sort of argument without circularity, then perhaps this is indicative not that the method is in any way suspect, but on the contrary, that it is irreducibly constitutive  of rationality.  From this perspective, therefore, it is analytic  that induction 
is rational:  to say that a non-deductive rule or generalisation is rationally well-founded just is  to say, in part, that it is founded (directly or indirectly) on induction. 
The analytic defence has had a fair number of advocates,
43 but the two best known 
are probably Paul Edwards (1949) and P.F. Strawson (1952, chapter 9).  Strawson’s position is nicely summed up by the following two passages, one from the beginning of his presentation and one from near its end: 
                                               
 
43 For a few references to the argument’s heyday see Kyburg (1964), especially pp. 258-9 but also 
pp. 254-5.  Black himself presents such a defence in his Encyclopedia  article (1967), pp. 178-9. 108 
 [I]f a man asked what grounds there were for thinking it reasonable to hold beliefs arrived at 
inductively, one might at first answer that there were good and bad inductive arguments, that 
sometimes it was reasonable to hold a belief arrived at inductively and sometimes it was not.  If he 
... said that his question had been misunderstood, that he wanted to know whether induction in general was a reasonable method of inference, then we might well think his question senseless in the same way as the question whether deduction is in general valid; for to call a particular belief 
reasonable or unreasonable is to apply inductive standards .... (p. 249) 
So every successful method or recipe for finding out about the unobserved must be one which has 
inductive support; for to say that a recipe is successful is to say that it has been repeatedly applied with success; ....  [This] must not be confused with saying that “the inductive method” is justified by its success ...  I am not seeking to “justify the inductive method”, for no meaning has been given to this phrase.  ... I am saying, rather, that any successful method of finding out about the 
unobserved is necessarily justified by induction.  This is an analytic proposition. (p. 259) 
Though Strawson is surely right to point out that we in fact treat inductive success 
as a criterion of reasonableness for methods of factual inference, the obvious objection to this line of thought (cf. Urmson 1953) is that to call a method of inference “rational” is not merely to describe  the method or its past performance – to say that these match 
up to certain more or less standard criteria – but is also to evaluate  it – to say that it is a 
good  method of reasoning.  And such an evaluation is at least in part a matter of 
judging that the method we speak of has genuine evidential force , making it such as to 
lead from true premises to true conclusions with some measure of reliability.  So while the question of the justification of induction may indeed be hard to pose distinctly because of this mixture of descriptive and evaluative content in the words that we use, it does not follow that the question is, as Strawson claims, entirely senseless.  For we 109 
 can still meaningfully ask whether what we call “reasonable” really is so – whether the 
standard inductive methods that we treat as paradigms of reasonableness actually  carry 
the real evidential force that our language implicitly ascribes to them. 
7.4 The Pragmatic Justification 
The pragmatic  approach to the question of justification accepts that the question can 
indeed properly be asked, but then goes on to stress, in a somewhat Strawsonian spirit, that it cannot directly be answered.  To those impressed by Hume’s sceptical assault this attitude can seem almost inevitable:  “How could we realistically hope to justify our most fundamental  method of factual inference, when Hume has shown that it 
cannot be proved reliable by a priori  reasoning, and we have no other method of 
reasoning to which we can appeal for the purpose even in principle, since no other method has half as much authority as the one we are attempting to validate?” 
“Validation”, then, is impossible, but the aim of the pragmatic justification is to 
provide instead a “vindication”, to use a term and a distinction made famous by Herbert Feigl (1950).  On this account the validation  of rules or methods is the process 
of showing that they are warranted by reference to more fundamental rules or methods – and clearly this cannot be done in the case of those (such as induction) that are the most fundamental of all.  Here, however, vindication  is still a possibility, whereby the 
fundamental rule or method is shown to be worthy of that status not by reference to 110 
 others, but through a demonstration that it is appropriately suited to accomplish the 
purpose that is expected of it. 
Given the agreed impossibility of proving induction to be reliable, any attempted 
vindication must obviously take some other form.  And here Hans Reichenbach and his former pupil Wesley Salmon have pursued the aim of showing that although induction 
admittedly cannot be guaranteed to work, at least it can be proved to be our “best bet”, 
in the sense that if any method of prediction at all will work, then certainly induction 
will.  Thus their justification is “pragmatic” in the same sense as Pascal’s Wager – it 
does not purport to show that a particular theoretical claim is rationally well-founded, but recommends that in practice we rely on the truth of that claim on the principle that if it is indeed true, we prosper, and if it is not, then our cause is lost whatever we do.  The outcome may be uncertain, but given this “nothing to lose” situation, at least it is obvious where the rational punter must lay his stake. 
Reichenbach (1949, p. 429) saw the fundamental task of induction as that of 
acquiring information about empirical probabilities, and given his adherence to the “Frequentist” view of probability (cf. §8.1), this amounts to the discovery of limiting frequencies of attributes within classes of objects (or, strictly, sequences  of objects of a 
given class).  Accordingly, the aim of his pragmatic reasoning (1949, pp. 469-82) is to vindicate the so-called “straight rule” of induction by enumeration:  the rule whereby an observed relative frequency of an attribute in a sample (for example the hitherto observed proportion of ravens that have been black) is taken to be representative of the class/sequence from which the sample comes (thus it is inferred that ravens in the           111 
 future will continue to exhibit a similar relative frequency of blackness to that which 
obtains in our observed sample).  Salmon, refining Reichenbach’s approach, presents the Pascalian options very starkly (1963b, p. 87): 
 Sequence has a limit Sequence has no limit 
Rule of induction by 
enumeration adopted (A)  Value of limit 
established (B)  Value of limit 
not established 
Another rule adopted (C)  Value of limit may 
or may not be established (D)  Value of limit 
not established 
The controversial boxes are obviously the two on the left-hand side.  Thus the 
proponent of this sort of pragmatic justification has to demonstrate:  (A) That the straight rule will indeed succeed in establishing the value of the relevant limit if there is one;  and (C) That no other rule carries a similar guarantee.
44 
                                                
44 Moreover although to demonstrate these things would no doubt be a major achievement in itself, 
it is very debatable how far a mere “vindication” of the straight rule would take us towards a justification 
of more sophisticated and widely applicable forms of inductive practice.  If in real life we are constantly using a host of less abstract criteria to adjudicate between competing predictive hypotheses, then there may seem little point to a pragmatic  justification in such limited terms unless it can be extended to other 
more realistic methods without undermining its own basis.  (And this indeed seems doubtful, precisely because its foundation is so limited – e.g. Salmon’s argument crucially depends on the fact that his rival rules are restricted to inference on the minimal basis of observed frequencies only, to the exclusion of considerations of order etc.)  At any rate, the task of inductive vindication is by no means complete even 
once (A) and (C) are successfully established. 112 
 To summarise a complex debate very briefly, the enduring difficulty with (A) has 
been that of “the short run” (how can we in any finite time have any assurance that observed frequencies will correspond to the eventual limiting frequency even if there is one?); while most discussion of (C) has centred on the prospects of excluding rival “asymptotic” rules, which by definition converge eventually to the same limit as the 
straight rule but may do so only after a long succession of wildly different short run 
predictions.  The main tools Salmon (1963a, 1963b, 1968a) develops to effect this exclusion are his criteria of “regularity” (mutual consistency of predictions about different attributes) and of “linguistic invariance” (roughly, mutual consistency of predictions independently of the vocabulary used), but despite his tenacious endeavours it cannot be said that these have stood up particularly well under detailed scrutiny.  Perhaps there is a future in the general idea of a pragmatic vindication of induction, but the incisive criticisms made for example by Skyrms (1965) and Hacking (1968) cast what I suspect will be an enduring shadow over Reichenbach and Salmon’s particular version of that enterprise, as Salmon (1968b) seems in part to acknowledge. 
7.5 The Impotence of the Non-Probabilistic 
Attempts at Justification 
Our review of the three non-probabilistic strategies for justifying induction has 
admittedly been very brief and cursory.  However even this has been sufficient to            113 
 reveal reasons why, whatever their arguable merits, each one of them is quite unable to 
make any dent in Hume’s position as that has been interpreted in Part I of the thesis. 
Against the inductive  justification we can invoke the understanding of Humean 
presupposition that was developed in §2.5 and used in §3.2 to clarify what I take to be another Humean notion, that of “presuppositional circularity”.  It was argued there that 
trivial deductive circularity, the only form which Stove recognises, is quite insufficient 
to do justice to Hume’s reasoning.  It now appears that Black may have been subject to a similar deductivist myopia, which prevented him from noticing that non-deductive arguments too can be viciously circular, a fact that Hume himself was well aware of.  In short, then, Black’s self-supporting inductive inference fails for precisely the reason that Hume spells out in stage (16) of his argument:  inductive inference can confer rational well-foundedness on its conclusion only if the presupposition of such inference is itself rationally well-founded;  hence any inductive inference which purports to establish the rational well-foundedness of that presupposition will inevitably fail to do so.  This circularity is not indeed of the crude deductive kind, but it is just as vicious. 
Turning now to the analytic  justification, here too we have good grounds for 
ascribing more philosophical sophistication to Hume than to some of his modern would-be refuters.  For as we saw in §§6.2-3, his view of reason is complex and subtle:  he is very ready to acknowledge that induction is paradigmatically reasonable in an important and genuinely normative sense, while in a somewhat more rigorous normative sense, his argument shows that it is not.  Those who “defend” induction by appealing to purely descriptive criteria of reasonableness are therefore in one respect      114 
 being more  sceptical than Hume himself (for they thus undermine the normativity of 
reason), while at the same time failing to recognise the legitimate sceptical force of his famous argument (that induction cannot be justified by any form of reason that is broadly analogous to intellectual perception ).  In so far as the analytic justification has 
any merit, then, Hume can comfortably go along with it, for he himself takes induction 
to be paradigmatically reasonable in his intermediate, “empirical” sense.  But as a 
would-be rebuttal of Hume, the analytic justification is utterly ineffective.
45 
Finally, we come to the pragmatic  justification, which on its own admission seems 
to pose little threat to the Humean position.  For the very fact that it aims only at a Pascalian vindication indicates that its intended role is more that of a Humean “sceptical solution” than that of a refutation of “sceptical doubts”.  And this naturally invites comparison with Hume’s own sceptical solution, against which the narrow Reichenbach/Salmon approach begins to look weak and artificial.  They aim to show that we have purely pragmatic grounds for employing the “straight rule” in statistical inference – if limiting frequencies are what we seek, then that is how we should find them.  But even if this conditional can be substantiated (and we have seen some reason to doubt this), still a fundamental objection remains.  The question must be asked: why 
should we seek limiting frequencies at all?  The Reichenbach/Salmon response, of course, is that only thus can we make successful predictions – if we cannot discover 
                                               
 
45 Cohen (1970, p. 188) recognises this fact, despite his attribution to Hume of thoroughgoing 
scepticism:  “the premiss of the argument from ordinary language ... can readily be granted.  Very much 
the same thesis would have been accepted by the arch-sceptic himself, David Hume.” 115 
 such frequencies, or if there are none to be discovered, then no method of prediction 
whatever can work.  But this argument presupposes at a deeper level that the world is inductively uniform in some way, for if it were not, then perhaps an equally good route to true predictions would be to follow a random sequence of different methods (or even no method  at all).  The claim that our inferences can be successful only if the world is 
uniform through time takes for granted, in other words, that we are already committed 
to inference on the basis of such uniformities.  We are indeed thus committed, of course, as Hume repeatedly points out:  we do in fact believe firmly in uniformity, at least from day to day even if not in the infinite Reichenbachian “long run”.  Moreover we cannot stop believing this and judging accordingly, however hard we try – even the impact of one of the most powerful philosophical arguments ever devised has absolutely no effect on our animal tendency to believe and to infer.  This, surely, is as strong a pragmatic justification as one could possibly wish for, and by comparison with it, Salmon’s Pascalian wager and Reichenbach’s long run frequencies seem both farfetched and futile. 
7.6 Conclusion:  Probability or Bust! 
The task of this chapter is now complete.  Of all the possible strategies for refuting Hume that we have considered, the only one still in the field is, appropriately, the very candidate which the analysis in Part I itself identified (in §3.2) by finding the weak spot in Hume’s own argument – namely, the a priori  probabilistic strategy.  Of course apart 
from the discovery of that weak spot, we do not as yet have any particular grounds for 116 
 optimism here – perhaps the probabilistic approach will eventually turn out to be a 
complete dead end, just like the others.  But we have seen good reason to think that if this approach cannot  succeed in refuting Hume’s inductive scepticism, then nothing  
can.  In the following chapter I shall set the scene for a detailed investigation of this strategy, by briefly surveying its context within the philosophy of probability. 117 
 Chapter 8  Probability Theory 
(a)  Interpretations and Options 
8.1 Four Interpretations of Probability 
The interpretation of the notion of probability is an extremely contentious issue, with a 
large and ever-growing literature, but it is no part of the aim of this thesis to take sides in that debate, nor even to contribute to it – the issues are many and complex, and to do them justice would require far more space than is available here.  However if we are properly to address the question of whether probability theory can provide any assistance in countering Humean inductive scepticism, it is clearly essential at least to consider whether the interpretation of probability could have any influence on our prospects of returning an affirmative answer.  So at least some cursory discussion is called for. 
Leaving aside uninterpreted axiomatic treatments of the subject, there are broadly 
four main schools of probability interpretation that need to be considered.
46  These are: 
                                                
46 Fine (1973) provides an excellent though dated survey of the various theories, while Howson 
(1995) fills in some r ecent gaps.  Weatherford (1982) pp. 11-17 discusses the variant classifications that 
have been applied to such theories by Carnap, Nagel, Kyburg, Good, Von Wright, Black and Fine – the 
classification used here broadly follows, in relevant respects, those of Kyburg, Black and Fine. 118 
 (a) The Classical  tradition, so called because it continues in the spirit of Pascal, 
Laplace and the other founding fathers of probability.  The defining characteristic of this tradition is its emphasis on the derivation of assessments of probability from supposedly a priori  principles, notably the Principle of Indifference.  This 
principle is associated with the classical definition of probability in terms of 
proportions of equiprobable alternatives – a definition that is often seen to restrict 
the application of the notion to narrow and highly structured domains (e.g. games of chance). 
(b) The Logical Relation  tradition, which sees probability as an evidential relation 
between propositions, such relations extending beyond the limited range of the classical theory.  Since these evidential relations are taken to be logical rather than empirically based, theorists in this tradition (of whom Carnap is an obvious paradigm) have attempted to establish broad a priori  measures of probability, 
often defined relative to a formal language, to augment or replace the classical principles.  Some, such as Keynes, Jeffreys and Jaynes, can be seen as bridging the classical and the logical traditions – treating probability as a logical relation, but seeking to build on classical-style rather than language-relative principles. 
(c) The Subjective  or Personalist  tradition, which treats probability as a measure of 
purely subjective degrees of belief or, more rigorously, degrees of idealised belief (where much of the point of probabilistic analysis is precisely to render one’s actual degrees of belief more consistent and systematic than they otherwise would have been).  This tradition, of which notable adherents include De Finetti, Good, (R.C.) Jeffrey, Ramsey, and Savage, can largely be seen as a reaction to the failure 119 
 of classical and logical theorists to demonstrate convincing a priori  principles of 
probability assessment – in default of such principles, perhaps the most that can realistically be hoped for is internal coherence rather than a priori  rationality. 
(d) The Frequentist  or Objective  tradition, which identifies probabilities with long-run 
relative frequencies of outcomes in concrete situations where a single type of event 
is being repeated (though some objectivists, such as Popper, are also willing to 
countenance “chance” or “propensities” to extend the theory to individual events).
47  T h o s e  w i t h i n  t h i s  t r a d i ti o n ,  s u c h  a s  R e i c h e n b a c h  a n d  V e n n  b u t  m o s t  
influentially Von Mises, see probabilities as contingent objective properties open to empirical discovery (as opposed to being a priori , logical or merely subjective).  
The frequentist tradition stands out from the others that we have discussed in making relatively little use of the notion of prior probabilities and hence of Bayes’ Theorem (to be discussed in §9.4).  For example the “Neyman-Pearson” statistical methodology, which has long been orthodoxy for the testing of scientific hypotheses, is based purely upon the comparison of experimental results against expectations drawn from the hypotheses being compared, and takes no account of prior assessments of the relative probability of the hypotheses themselves.
48  The 
entrenchment of this orthodoxy can be gauged from the common tendency of 
                                                
47 See for example Popper (1959), Hacking (1965) chapters 1 and 2, Mellor (1971), Gillies (1973) 
chapter 7. 
48 The same is true also of Fisher’s “fiducial” treatment of statistical inference based on likelihoods 
(see §9.4 for the definition of this term).  Two useful philosophical discussions of the Neyman-Pearson 
and Fisher theories are Hacking (1965) and Seidenfeld (1979a). 120 
 statisticians to class all non-frequentists as “Bayesians”, even though 
“Bayesianism” so defined encompasses at least three different traditions. 
We shall soon see that for the purposes of this thesis, our required perspective on the 
interpretation of probability can be narrowed down significantly from these four apparently quite distinct options. 
8.2 Clarifying the Options 
First, there is the obvious point that any empirical  theory of probability is inevitably 
going to be quite useless for the purpose of yielding an a priori  probabilistic defence of 
induction, which as we have seen is the only type of defence that can even in principle withstand the Humean sceptical assault.  If probabilities are essentially a matter of empirical limiting frequencies, or of physical propensities that generate those frequencies, then Hume will have an easy answer to any argument that purports to justify induction by appeal to such probabilities: 
All inferences from experience suppose, as their foundation, that the future will resemble the past, 
and that similar frequencies and propensities  will be conjoined with similar sensible qualities.  ... It 
is impossible, therefore, that any arguments from experience of past frequencies and propensities  
can prove this resemblance of the past to the future; since all these arguments are founded on the supposition of that  resemblance. 
  (adapted from E37-8) 121 
 So henceforth the Frequentist or Objective tradition of interpretation need not concern 
us – if it were to turn out that this tradition provides the only legitimate understanding of probability, then we could immediately infer a negative answer to the question we are posing, regarding the possibility of a probabilistic defence of induction. 
It might seem also, at first sight, that the Subjective or Personalist tradition is 
equally irrelevant to our purpose, precisely because of its overt “subjectivism”, and that 
therefore the Classical and Logical interpretations are the only ones worth considering in the quest for a rational defence of induction.  However this issue is not quite so straightforward.  And here it is helpful first to clarify some ambiguity in the terms “Objective” and “Subjective”, which might otherwise confuse our discussion.  The crux of the ambiguity is that the “Objective”/“Subjective” dichotomy can be, and commonly is, drawn across at least two largely independent dimensions.  One of these is what we might call the “world/person” dimension, and another the “impartial/biased” dimension (for want of better terms – the words “objective” and “subjective” are hard to replace here).  Because these dimensions are distinct, the two dichotomies combine to generate four possible options, which we can represent diagrammatically as follows:
49 
                                                
49 This discussion has to be extremely superficial to keep it down to a manageable size and focus.  
Arguably the objective/subjective dichotomy can be drawn across no fewer than five more or less distinct 
dimensions, namely: world/person, impartial/biased, non-mental/mental, intersubjective/ private, measurable/non-measurable, which however are interrelated in complex ways so that some combinations are impossible, while others may conflate together a number of conceptually distinct possibilities.  The four-option diagram is therefore very much a simplification, in which I have deliberately skewed the 
analysis towards combinations that are directly relevant to the task at hand. 122 
  “Objective” = in the world “Subjective” = in the person 
“Objective” 
= from an 
impartial or 
impersonal 
point of view FREQUENTISM  
Facts  about the world , which are 
there whether or not anyone knows or believes anything about them, and which are typically open to impartial scientific investigation. L
OGICAL BAYESIANISM  
Facts  about the state of a person’s  
knowledge  and reasonable beliefs , 
which are to be considered as rationally answerable to impartial logical investigation and analysis. 
“Subjective” 
= from a 
biased or 
personal 
point of view PERSONALIST BAYESIANISM  
Opinions  about the world as held 
by a particular individual, which are to be considered more or less as they stand, and not as answerable to external “impartial” criteria. B
AYESIAN DECISION THEORY  
Opinions and desires  as held by  a 
particular individual, which are to be considered more or less as they stand, and not as answerable to external “impartial” criteria  
Though no more than a crude caricature, this diagram enables a useful distinction to be 
drawn between two different types of “Subjective” probability interpretation, namely those I have called “Logical” and “Personalist” Bayesianism.  Both start from the subjective situation of the individual attempting to draw conclusions about the world on the basis of his existing knowledge and beliefs, and both are “Bayesian” in that amongst those potential subjective data are included prior expectations (or, more technically, prior probabilities) concerning the range of possible conclusions that are contemplated.
50  Where the two differ, however, is in the extent to which the subjective 
data, and these prior expectations in particular, are answerable to advance rational scrutiny.  For the extreme Logical Bayesian, on the one hand, mere opinions are of no    
                                               
 
50 The broad use of “Bayesianism” and the ambiguity of the “Objective”/”Subjective” dichotomy 
create enormous scope for confusion here.  For example it is not uncommon for what I have called 
Logical Bayesianism to be referred to as “Objective” [= impartial] Bayesianism (e.g. Howson 1995). 123 
 account whatever, and only rationally corroborated prior probabilities should figure at 
all in statistical inference.  For the extreme Personalist, on the other hand, absolutely any prior expectation should be taken into account no matter how flimsy its foundation, and rational adjustment comes to play a role only through the operation of Bayes’ theorem on those prior expectations within statistical inference. 
These sketches of Logical Bayesianism and of Personalism are indeed caricatures.  
No doubt most “Subjective” probability theorists would fall at intermediate points along the spectrum from the one extreme to the other, and perhaps few, if any, would consistently adhere to either of the endpoints.  Nevertheless we can now make use of this admittedly crude analysis to clarify the possibilities for a Bayesian justification of induction. 
 To deal first with the Personalist end of the spectrum, it is clear that any 
justification of induction from this angle must in no way depend on the original “prior probability” assignments which, for the Personalist, are representations of an individual’s possibly quite irrational and arbitrary initial beliefs.  However this does not, in itself, render the Personalist perspective a completely hopeless basis for a defence of induction, because one of the cardinal virtues which its supporters ascribe to it is precisely its ability to generate inferences which, on iteration , become less and less 
sensitive to the particular choice of original prior probability function.  The Bayesian approach to statistical inference, as we shall see in detail later, involves taking the prior probabilities for the hypotheses being assessed, together with relevant probabilistic data concerning any new empirical evidence and its relation to those hypotheses, and then applying Bayes’ theorem to yield new, “posterior” probabilities for the given 124 
 hypotheses, which then in their turn can come to play the role of “prior” probabilities in 
future inferences.  Thus the prior probabilities get replaced, and as this process is repeated, it often happens that the posterior probability function which eventually results is only minimally dependent on those original prior probabilities from which the series of inferences ultimately started.  This is the lifeline for the Personalist attempt to 
provide a fully rational basis for induction.  To quote from a highly respected 
“subjectivist” manifesto (Edwards, Lindman and Savage 1963,  p. 540): 
If observations are precise, in a certain sense, relative to the prior distribution on which they bear, 
then the form and properties of the prior distribution have negligible influence on the posterior distribution.  From a practical point of view, then, the untrammeled subjectivity of opinion about a parameter ceases to apply as soon as much data become available.  More generally, two people with widely divergent prior opinions but reasonably open minds will be forced into arbitrarily close agreement about future observations by a sufficient amount of data. 
Hence the Personalist can after all aspire to build a rational defence of induction, by 
showing that anyone who is not from the start dogmatically sceptical and closed minded can be brought, by experience, to share the inductivist’s expectations.  As we shall see in Chapter 9, this is precisely the strategy which is followed by De Finetti. 
Turning to the extreme “Logical Bayesian” end of the spectrum, we can now see 
that this merges completely into the “Logical Relation” approach, for both are characterised by, first, the search for a priori  principles of “original” prior probability 
(their crucial difference from Personalism), and secondly, a reliance on Bayes’ Theorem for statistical inference, using a combination of the prior probabilities for any   125 
 relevant hypotheses together with, as usual (and quoting verbatim  from our earlier 
discussion of Personalism) “probabilistic data concerning any new empirical evidence and its relation to  those hypotheses”.  Since the strict Logical Bayesian aims to use 
a priori  principles to derive original prior probabilities for both hypotheses and 
evidence, his only other data will thus indeed be relational – in fact it will take the form 
of “conditional probabilities” expressing the “likelihood” of the evidence relative to 
each hypothesis.  Hence extreme Logical Bayesianism just is  Logical Relationism. 
Clearly the Logical Relationist has more options than the Personalist in his quest 
for an a priori  justification of induction – he can use all the resources that are open to 
the Personalist, as well as any principles of “original probability” that he is able to establish a priori .
51  However to cut any ice with the sceptic these principles must be 
a priori  in the literal sense (rather than just being taken for granted as part of some 
foundational framework or theory) and this makes the Carnapian language-based approach highly unsuitable.  So-called a priori  probability measures that are defined 
                                               
 
51 I have deliberately coined the term “original probability” here to avoid a serious risk of 
confusion with the terms “prior” and “ a priori ”.  “Prior probabilities” are simply the relevant 
probabilities as “fed in” to a particular application of Bayes’ Theorem – they need not be “prior” in any 
more fundamental sense (e.g. they will often themselves have been derived from a previous application of Bayes’ Theorem), and certainly they need not be justifiable a priori .  By “original probabilities” I 
mean the very first prior probabilities  that are used in a sequence of probabilistic calculations – the 
initial assignments of probability before any applications of Bayes’ Theorem have been made – and this 
term is intended to be neutral between the different interpretations of probability.  For the Logical probabilist such original probabilities may indeed only be appropriate if they are justifiable a priori , but 
obviously the extreme Personalist will be perfectly content with original probabilities that express 
merely personal prejudices with no a priori  warrant whatever. 126 
 relative to a particular language, and which can therefore generate different predictions 
depending on which language is chosen, are clearly no basis for an anti-sceptical defence even if they are (arguably) legitimate as tools in the construction of a formal system of inductive probability.  Even if there were no significant internal difficulties in the Carnapian project,
52 therefore, the Logical Relationist aspiring to justify 
induction would do much better to follow the path trod by Keynes, Jeffreys and Jaynes:  
seeking his a priori  probabilistic relations not in language, but in the only other place 
where tradition has plausibly claimed to find them – in logical symmetries. 
Symmetries are, of course, the implicit basis of the Classical view of probability, 
for it is the notion of symmetry that underlies the Principle of Indifference on which that tradition is very largely founded.  The symmetries involved in applications of the principle in its crudest form are purely epistemological:  if we are not aware  of any 
relevant difference between event A and event B, then this in itself supposedly provides 
sufficient grounds for ascribing to them equal probability.  Obviously then if our knowledge were different, our assessment of their probability might quite rightly  be 
different too, and this seems to show that the Principle of Indifference presupposes what is essentially a relational  view of probability – probability as a relation between 
the knowledge that we have and the events that we anticipate.
53  So it should in the end 
                                                
52 Which, of course, there are, though this is not the place to discuss them because Carnap’s system 
is too sophisticated to summarise very briefly.  Two useful overviews that consider it in the context of the justification of induction are Ayer (1972) pp. 33-40 and Salmon (1966) pp. 70-79. 
53 Benenson (1984) chapter VI provides a detailed argument for this conclusion. 127 
 be no surprise that the symmetry-seeking Logical Relation theorists such as Keynes, 
Jeffreys and Jaynes indeed seem to bridge the Classical and Logical traditions, as was remarked earlier.  In their hands these traditions merge, adding more sophisticated symmetries and thoroughgoing Bayesian inference to the former, whilst preserving intact its a prioristic  and language-independent perspective. 
8.3 Conceivable Probabilistic Perspectives 
for the Justification of Induction 
The foregoing discussion has substantially clarified the available options for a 
refutation of Hume.  It must be founded on a priori  reasoning about probabilities, but it 
can in principle be presented from either of two “Bayesian” perspectives – either the Personalist, or the Classical “flavour” of the Logical Relationist. 
A justification of induction within the Personalist tradition must aim to show that 
the rational individual’s beliefs will tend, through Bayesian updating, towards those that are inductively favourable, more or less independently of that individual’s original starting point.  The strength of such a justification will be its lack of any reliance on controversial a priori  original probabilities; its corresponding difficulty will be the 
extremely meagre materials with which it has to build. 
A justification of induction in the Classical/Logical Relationist tradition (which I 
shall henceforth often refer to simply as the “Logical” tradition) has the prospect of building with more impressive materials – the “Logicist” can aspire to establish 128 
 a priori  probabilistic principles that will rationally impel the impartial reasoner towards 
inductive conformity right from the start, and not merely over time like the Personalist’s relatively feeble iterative pressure.  On the other hand the credentials of these materials can be questioned:  allegedly a priori  probabilistic principles do not 
have a particularly reassuring track record, and the Principle of Indifference with its 
host of accompanying paradoxes has been a popular victim of philosophical target 
practice for over a century.  So the main problem for the Logicist is likely to be not the invention of a suitable argument, but rather the justification of its premises. 
Nevertheless in what follows I shall try to be as generous as possible to the 
Logicist, and give the benefit of the doubt to any alleged a priori  principle of 
probability which is based on moderately plausible logical symmetries, at least until it is proved guilty by leading to manifest contradiction:  hence for example Keynes’ version of the Principle of Indifference (described in §9.5 below) will be considered perfectly acceptable.  I shall also avoid raising irritating “quibbles” such as Goodman’s paradox – perhaps an overly generous concession, because this can be particularly awkward to meet from the Logicist standpoint.  If in subsequent chapters, therefore, my discussion occasionally appears to some readers to be giving the a priori  probabilist 
altogether too much, the reason is only that I wish to test his theory as far as it will go.  For having done so, even if it is not yet refuted, we shall at least have a better understanding of its limits and of what resources it requires if it is to do the job that the anti-Humean asks of it.  We turn now to review the resources provided by the theory of probability itself. 129 
 Chapter 9  Probability Theory 
(b) Basic Principles 
9.1 Introduction:  Fundamental Principles 
from Two Bayesian Perspectives 
The purpose of this chapter is to bring together, for convenient reference and review, 
the main principles of probability theory and some of its most relevant and fundamental results.  Given the controversy which surrounds that theory’s interpretation, it would obviously be impractical to attempt to present its central principles from a completely “unbiased” point of view that takes all the various perspectives equally into account.  Fortunately, however, our discussion in §8.3 has made clear that only two broad categories of interpretation need concern us – the Logical and the Personalist – and since both of these are “Bayesian”, nearly all of their principles are the same even if the foundation of those principles can be radically different.  To deal with both as simply as possible, therefore, I shall initially present the “fundamental notions” of the theory from a single perspective only, that of the “Logicist” Harold Jeffreys in his Theory of Probability  (Jeffreys, 1961, chapter I), 
before going on in §9.3 to comment briefly on the respects in which Personalism is, or can be, differently founded.  As the last chapter indicated and we shall see later, there are indeed excellent reasons, given the topic of this thesis, for taking Jeffreys’ 130 
 presentation rather than any other in the Logical tradition as our point of reference and 
departure.54 
9.2 A Summary of Jeffreys’ Axiom System 
There follows a statement of Jeffreys’ fundamental notions, definitions, axioms, theorems and conventions, nearly all of which are either followed by, or introduced by, my own brief comments.  As far as possible I have given Jeffreys’ principles verbatim , 
except for standardisation of the symbols and formal notation in conformity with common modern usage and the other parts of this thesis.  Comprehension may be eased by bearing in mind the following general conventions:  e is used to signify a 
proposition that would typically state an item of evidence , whereas h, k and l are more 
likely to state hypotheses .  A pair of mutually inconsistent hypotheses may be referred 
to as h and h
′ (or k and k′), and a series  of hypotheses (in some cases mutually related 
by being exclusive and/or exhaustive) are signified by h1, h2,..., hn (or k1, k2,..., kn).  
Upper case letters are used to refer to sets of propositions, for example background 
knowledge ( B) or subsets of the h and k series ( H, K, L etc as required). 
                                                
54 Notably, that he is clear but theoretically rigorous; takes probabilities to be comparable (unlike 
Keynes, for example); and very explicitly leaves room for improper prior distributions to represent ignorance.  Typifying the regard in which Jeffreys is held, even by those within rival traditions, is the following remark from Hacking (1965, p. 201): “Jeffreys’ Theory of Probability  is the most profound 
treatise on statistics from a logical point of view which has been published this century”. 131 
 PRIMITIVE NOTION  “Given e, h is more probable than k” 
Jeffreys’ theory is relational, in the sense that it takes probability to involve a relation between 
two propositions rather than a property of one proposition in itself.  To minimise any 
commitment to one particular scale on which such relational probabilities are to be measured, however, he constructs his system of axioms on the primitive notion of comparisons , rather 
than absolute values , of such relational probabilities.  This primitive notion is therefore a 
three-place relation. 
AXIOM 1 Given e, h is either more, equally, or less probable than k, and no 
two of these alternatives can be true. 
This will turn out to be a crucial assumption of the conventional theory of probability, for it 
implies both that relations of probabilification exist between any two propositions whatever (relative to any third proposition), and also that the strength of such relations must be comparable on a single linear scale (so that probabilities cannot, for example, be interval-valued or in other ways only partially ordered).  Such an assumption, or its non-relational counterpart, is of course by no means peculiar to Jeffreys. 
AXIOM 2 If e, h, k, l are four propositions, and, given e, h is more probable 
than k and k is more probable than l, then, given e, h is more probable than l. 
In other words, the probability relation (with fixed “given”) is transitive. 
AXIOM 3 All propositions deducible from a proposition e have the same 
probability on data e; and all propositions inconsistent with e have the same probability on data e. 132 
 This establishes fixed points at the ends of the scale of probabilities, representing certainty on 
the one hand and impossibility on the other.  Jeffreys refrains from giving these specific 
values (e.g. the conventional 1 and 0) in order to be able to emphasise later that the values to be given are purely conventional, and are no part of the essential axiomatic structure. 
AXIOM 4 If, given e, h and h ′ cannot both be true, and if, given e, k and k ′ 
cannot both be true, and if, given e, h and k are equally probable and 
h′ and k′ are equally probable, then, given e, (h ∨ h′) and (k ∨ k′) are 
equally probable. 
This provides the basis, within Jeffreys’ relational and comparative theory, for his counterpart 
of the familiar addition rule for calculating the probability of disjunctions of mutually 
exclusive propositions.  In order to make this correspondence more explicit, however, he next 
states a theorem which immediately follows from successive applications of the axiom, and then introduces by convention (he is careful later, on pp. 29-30, to show that this is just a matter of convention) the standard method of representing probabilities, namely by additive numbers (though not yet specifically in the usual [0,1] interval): 
THEOREM 1 If h 1, h2,..., h n are exclusive, and k 1, k2,..., k n are exclusive, on data e, 
and if, given e, the propositions h 1 and k 1, h2 and k 2,..., h n and k n are 
equally probable in pairs, then given e, (h 1 ∨ h2 ... ∨ hn) and  
(k1 ∨ k2 ... ∨ kn) are equally probable. 
CONVENTION 1 We assign the larger number on given data to the more probable 
proposition (and therefore equal numbers to equally probable propositions). 133 
 CONVENTION 2 If, given e, h and h ′ are exclusive, then the number assigned on data 
e to (h ∨ h′) is the sum of those assigned to h and to h ′. 
The transitivity of the probability relation (Axiom 2) makes numeric representation 
appropriate, while Conventions 1 and 2 ensure that increasing numeric values will be made to 
correspond to increasing “degrees of belief”, combined additively (rather than, say, multiplicatively – see Jeffreys pp. 29-30 for a brief explanation of this alternative). 
AXIOM 5 The set of possible probabilities on given data, ordered in terms of 
the relation “more probable than”, can be put into one-one correspondence with a set of real numbers in increasing order. 
This axiom is needed, in Jeffreys’ words, “to ensure that there are enough numbers for our 
purpose” – it rules out certain complex patterns of ordering which would resist reduction to a single continuum (e.g. reflecting the impo ssibility of a bijective mapping from Ò² to Ò).  This 
done, Jeffreys is now able to introduce symbolism for the fundamental notion in terms of 
which his theory is to be formalised: 
NOTATION  P(h | e) is henceforth to be used to signify the number associated with 
the probability of the proposition h on data e. 
To make any further progress, however, it is necessary to come to a decision on the question 
of which  interval of real numbers is to be available for the representation of probabilities – in 
other words, following on from Axiom 3, which particular number is to represent certainty and which impossibility. 
THEOREM 2  If e is consistent with the general rules, and e entails ¬h, then 
P(h | e) = 0. 134 
 In fact the choice of number for impossibility has already been implicitly determined for us by 
Axiom 3 and Convention 2 (so the last result is a theorem rather than an axiom).  Axiom 3 
requires that where e is inconsistent with h and with k (and hence, obviously, with ( h ∨ k) too) 
, then on data e, all three of the propositions h, k, and ( h ∨ k) should have the same 
probability.  Convention 2 requires that these probabilities be additive, that (on data e) the 
probability of ( h ∨ k) must be equal to the probability of h plus the probability of k.  And these 
two conditions together imply that impossibility, the very bottom of the probability scale, 
must be represented by zero. 
CONVENTION 3 If e entails h, then P(h | e) = 1. 
The top of the scale, however, does have to be determined by convention, and it is obviously convenient to fix the representation of certainty so that it is numerically independent of the particular data e (given that no previous axiom has ensured this).  To emphasise that the 
choice of the number 1 for certainty, though standard, is not the only option worth keeping 
open, Jeffreys here explicitly makes the point that “there are cases where we wish to express ignorance over an infinite range of values of a quantity, and it may be convenient to express 
certainty that the quantity lies in that range by ∞, in order to keep ratios for finite ranges 
determinate” (p. 21).  From now on, he is very careful to draw attention to those parts of his 
system which depend on this convention, and I shall follow his lead. 
AXIOM 6 If e & h entails k, then P(h & k | e) = P(h | e). 
Axiom 3 ensured that, on given data, any pair of propositions which are certain will be 
ascribed the same probability, but this new axiom is needed to extend the equiprobability of 
equivalent propositions to pairs that are less than certain.  Several theorems quickly follow: 135 
 THEOREM 3 If h and k are equivalent in the sense that each entails the other, then 
each entails (h & k), and the probabilities of h and k on any data must be equal.  Similarly, if (e & h) entails k, and (e & k) entails h, P(h | e) = P(k | e), since both are equal to P(h & k | e). 
T
HEOREM 4 P(h | e) = P(h & k | e) + P(h & ¬k | e). 
THEOREM 5 If h and k are two propositions, not necessarily exclusive on data e, 
P(h | e) + P(k | e) = P(h ∨ k | e) + P(h & k | e). 
THEOREM 6 If h 1, h2,... are a set of equally probable and exclusive alternatives on 
data e, and if H m and H n are disjunctions of two subsets of these 
alternatives, of numbers m and n, then P(H m | e) / P(H n | e) = m/n. 
Theorem 6, like those which preceded it, is expressed in a manner that is independent of 
Convention 3.  But we can now take advantage of that convention to give precise numerical expression to a special case of this last result: 
THEOREM 7 In the conditions of Theorem 6, if h 1, h2,..., h n are exhaustive on data 
e, and H n denotes their disjunction, then H n is entailed by e and 
P(H n | e) = 1.  It follows that P(H m | e) = m/n. 
 (presupposes Convention 3)  
Here Hn itself is a possible value of e, and hence P( Hm | Hn) = m/n, which is virtually the same 
as a famous rule of Laplace.  As Jeffreys puts it: “given that a set of alternatives are equally probable, exclusive, and exhaustive, the probability that some one of any subset is true is the ratio of the number in that subset to the whole number of possible cases” (p. 23). 136 
 THEOREM 8 Any probability can be expressed by a real number. 
 (presupposes Convention 3)  
Theorem 7 enables a probability of any non-negative rational value m/n to be specified, and 
by Axioms 1 and 2 (comparability and transitivity), any probability that is irrational will divide all such rationals into two disjoint but exhaustive subsets: those that are greater than it, and those that are less.  This partition will constitute a Dedekind section, and thus define a unique real number for the given irrational probability.  Note however that this theorem 
presupposes Convention 3, in that it applies only if infinite probability values are ruled out.  
DEFINITION  If x is a variable capable of a continuous set of values, we may 
consider the probability on data e that x is less than x 0, say 
  P(x < x 0 | e) = f(x 0). 
 If  f(x 0) is differentiable we shall then be able to write 
  P(x 0 < x < x 0 + dx 0 | e) = f′(x0) dx 0 + O(dx0) 
 We shall usually write this briefly P(dx | e) = f ′(x) dx (“dx” on the 
left meaning the proposition that x lie s in a particular range dx).  
f′(x) is called the probability density. 
 (presupposes Convention 3)  
Thus Jeffreys introduces the familiar notions of a cumulative distribution function f(x) and a 
probability density function f′(x), the latter of which importantly presupposes that the former 
is differentiable.  This being the case, the probability (on data e) that the variable x will lie 
between the limits x1 and x2 (where x1 < x2) can be expressed in either of two ways, namely as  
f(x2) – f(x1) or as the equivalent ′∫fxd x
xx
()
12. 137 
 THEOREM 9 If L is the disjunction of a set of exclusive alternatives on data e, and 
if H and K are subsets of L (possibly overlapping) and if the alternatives in L are all equally probable on data e and also on data H & e, then 
  P(H & K | e) = P(H | e).P(K | H & e) / P(H | H & e). 
Though not a particularly useful theorem, this is the first to relate probabilities assessed on 
different data ( e for some formulae, and ( H & e) for others).  Jeffreys points out that this style 
of result is provable only on the assumption that the alternatives in L are equiprobable both 
with respect to data e and with respect to data  ( H & e), and so the need to be able to relate 
probabilities on different data more widely requires the introduction of a further axiom, for which he takes the form of Theorem 9 as a model: 
AXIOM 7 For any propositions e, h, k, 
  P(h & k | e) = P(h | e).P(k | h & e) / P(h | h & e) 
This is the familiar product rule, except that in order to maximise the independence of his 
system from Convention 3, it includes the expression P( h | h & e) as a denominator.  If 
Convention 3 is presupposed, this denominator becomes 1 and can therefore be omitted: 
AXIOM 7a For any propositions e, h, k, 
  P(h & k | e) = P(h | e).P(k | h & e) 
 (presupposes Convention 3)  
Jeffreys remarks on the importance of noticing that the second factor here, P( k | h & e), is not 
in general equal to P( k | e).  Where it is equal, however, we have a case of what Jeffreys call 
irrelevance , though I shall prefer the now standard term independence : 138 
 DEFINITION  If P(k | h & e) = P(k | e), then h is said to be independent of k, 
given e. 
We now come, finally, to the part of the theory that has been most significant in the 
philosophy of induction, namely, the formulae for so-called inverse probability inference.  In 
order to minimise his reliance on Convention 3, Jeffreys first states the relevant theorem in a way that does not presuppose a particular  numerical probability value for certainty: 
THEOREM 10 If.h 1, h2,..., h n are a set of alternatives, B the information already 
available, and e some additional information, then the ratio 
  Ph e B Ph h B
Ph B Pe h Brr r
rr(|&) .(|&)
(|) . (|&)  is the same for all the h r. 
Axiom 7 (the product rule) yields expressions for P( e & hr | B) and P( hr & e | B), the evident 
equality of which determines an equation from which the ratio specified in the theorem is derivable as P( e | e & B) / P( e | B), and this clearly does not vary for the h
r.  Needless to say 
this theorem can be simplified significantly if the second factor in the numerator of the ratio, P(h
r | hr & B), is removed in accordance with Convention 3: 
THEOREM 10a In the conditions of Theorem 10, the ratio 
  Ph p B
Ph B Pp h Br
rr(| &)
(|) . ( |&)  is the same for all the h r. 
 (presupposes Convention 3) 
In this case the expression for the value of the given ratio also simplifies, to 1/ P( e | B).  So we 
now have a formula for P( hr | e & B), namely P( hr | B).P(e | hr & B) / P( e | B). 139 
 9.3 The Basis of Personalism 
At this point we can leave Jeffreys’ presentation, having seen the establishment of his 
main principles as far as Bayes Theorem, which is the last formula derived above.  Before moving on to discuss this important theorem in more depth, it will be useful briefly to contrast how probability theory may be founded from a Personalistic perspective.  In fact Personalistic approaches can be in detail very similar to Jeffreys’, except that they are unlikely to sanction the use of “improper” probability distributions in which certainty is represented by infinity rather than by 1.  It is hard to make sense of such a distribution in personalistic terms (except as an approximation), and this indeed arguably casts a shadow over the coherence of the notion even in Jeffreys’ system, given that he intends probabilities to represent “degrees of reasonable confidence” (p. 15) or “reasonable degree[s] of belief” (p. 34). 
As explained in §8.1, the Personalist sees probability as a measure of strength of 
actual  belief or confidence, and given the obvious subjectivity of this notion, it might 
seem hard to justify the claim that such degrees of belief can meaningfully be assigned numerical values, let alone the requirement that these values should conform to any formal axioms.  The most popular way of justifying the assignment of numerical values is in terms of betting quotients (e.g. if I consider it fair to bet £1 on P’s being true for a 
possible win of £3, then I implicitly assign P a probability of ¼), but it is also possible 
to do so simply by appeal to the notion of equal degree of belief, following the sort of construction that is given by Jeffreys (see especially his Theorems 7 and 8 in §9.2). 140 
 Once numerical degrees of confidence have been established there are, as Hacking 
puts it, “overwhelming reasons for making [them] satisfy the probability calculus” (1968, p. 53).  He lists six different arguments for this conclusion (with references, corrected here, giving “good authorities” rather than original sources): 
1. Bayes’ arguments (Bayes 1763). 
2. Metrization argument: if a metric is induced on comparisons of confidence, it must, subject to 
very feeble conditions, satisfy the pr obability axioms (Sav age 1972, pp. 33-40). 
3. Joint development of utility and degrees of confidence (Ramsey 1926). 4. Dutch book or coherence argument (Kemeny 1955). 5. Subjective version of arguments in Jeffrey’s Theory of Probability  (Jeffreys 1961). 
6. Differentiation argument: if you want degrees of confidence to be mathematically tractable, 
and to admit of some sort of learning from experience, they have to satisfy the axioms (Cox 1961, part I). 
If you admit numerical degrees of confidence at all, I do not think you can consistently and 
simultaneously argue against all these arguments. 
This is not the place to look further into these arguments, but Hacking’s main point 
(elaborated also in his 1965 pp. 210-11 and 1966 p. 335) is well made – the Personalist has many resources to which he can appeal in establishing the principles of his theory once precise numerical degrees of belief have been accepted.
55 
                                                
55 It is the notion of precision  which should, in my view, be the main sticking point.  Typically the 
requirement of precision is justified in a very summary manner, for example by Savage (1962):  “ ... 
attempts to say that the exact probabilities are ‘meaningless’ or ‘non-existent’ pose more severe 141 
 9.4 Bayes’ Theorem 
In the remainder of this chapter it will be useful to draw attention to a few of the 
particular concepts and results that are destined to play an especially significant role in what follows.  The first of these is Bayes’ Theorem, which was the last formula to be derived in the presentation of Jeffreys’ system above.  However to give it a more intuitive feel, I shall here discuss it in less formal terms (omitting any reference to “tautological” and to “background” evidence that is taken for granted in the context, just as in the discussion of Stove – see §5.2 note 36). 
Bayes’ Theorem is used, as discussed in the previous chapter, when we wish to 
“update” our prior assessments of the probability of some hypothesis h, in the light of 
our observation or acquisition of some relevant item of evidence e.  The theorem then 
uses the following pieces of information: 
P(h)  The prior probability of the hypothesis h, before  the updating takes place 
P(e)  The prior probability of the evidence e, before  it was observed 
 P( e
 | h) The conditional probability of the evidence e, given that  h is true.  This is 
also called by Fisher’s term the likelihood , meaning the likelihood that the 
evidence e would have come about given that h were true. 
                                                                                                                                         
problems than they are intended to resolve, similarly for replacements of individual probabilities by 
intervals or by second-order probabilities.  ... Sight should not be lost of the fact that a person may find himself in an economic situation that entails acting in accordance with a sharply defined probability, 
whether the person chooses his act with security or not.” (p. 145). 142 
 These are combined together as follows, to yield the conditional probability of the 
hypothesis h given that the evidence e has been observed – this conditional probability 
is precisely the updated  probability for h, in the light of evidence e, that is the goal of 
Bayesian inference: 
    PhePh Peh
Pe(| )() (|)
()=× 
Some obvious points follow.  First, the updated probability for h is directly 
proportional to its prior probability – so other things being equal, the more probable a hypothesis starts out the more probable it will remain, and in particular, if the prior probability of a hypothesis is zero then Bayes’ Theorem is powerless to raise it whatever the evidence.  Secondly, the updated probability for the hypothesis is also proportional to the likelihood – so, other things again being equal, this means that the more some evidence is made likely by a hypothesis, the more that evidence, if it is forthcoming, confirms the theory.  Finally, the updated probability for the hypothesis is inversely  proportional to the prior probability of the evidence – so an item of evidence 
which would, but for the hypothesis, be very unlikely, will do more to support the hypothesis than an item of evidence that would anyway have been unsurprising.  This last point is relatively unimportant compared with the others, because uses of Bayes’ are often more a matter of comparing hypotheses rather than assessing their probability by absolute standards.  In that case, P( e) drops out as irrelevant, and the crucial matter 
is simply the relations of proportionality amongst the other three components.  This helps to explain why Jeffreys presents the theorem in the way that he does. 143 
 9.5 Prior Probabilities and Indifference 
We have already seen that prior probabilities play a crucial role in Bayesian inference, 
and the last chapter included some discussion of the different ways in which they are typically assessed by Personalists on the one hand, and Classical/Logical Relationists on the other.  The latter’s traditional reliance on the Principle of Indifference is controversial, but Jeffreys believes it to be to a matter of logic: 
If there is no reason to believe one hypothesis rather than another, the probabilities are equal.  ... to 
say that the probabilities are equal is a precise way of saying that we have no ground for choosing between the alternatives.   ... To take the prior probabilities different in the absence of observational 
reason for doing so would be an expression of sheer prejudice.  The rule that we should take them 
equal is not a statement of any belief about the actual composition of the world, nor is it an inference from previous experience; it is merely the formal way of expressing ignorance.  ... It is not a new rule in the present theory because it is an immediate application of Convention 1.  ... When reasonable degree of belief is taken as the fundamental notion the rule is immediate.  We 
begin by making no assumption that one alternative is more likely than another and use our data to 
compare them.   (Jeffreys 1961 pp. 33-4) 
Jeffreys here describes the principle as “an immediate application of 
Convention 1”, namely, the convention that larger numbers signify greater probabilities.  But I suspect that its basis lies even further back, right at the start with his Axiom 1, where he asserts that propositions are universally comparable with respect to probability.  This thought clearly strongly informs the passage above, and indeed it is difficult to see how he could avoid some kind of Indifference Principle when once this axiom of comparability had been affirmed. 144 
 In this respect it is interesting to draw a contrast with another great figure in the 
Classical/Logical Relation tradition.  Keynes is notable for having resisted the idea that probabilistic relations apply universally, or even that where they do apply, they are always comparable: unlike Jeffreys, therefore, he did not believe that all probabilistic relationships can be fully and faithfully represented by simple numbers (a thought with 
which I shall in my concluding Chapter 14 express some sympathy, though I shall have 
to ignore it meanwhile).  But given these views, it is no coincidence, I believe, that Keynes was the far more astute and careful critic of the Principle of Indifference. 
Chapter IV of Keynes’ Treatise on Probability  is still one of the very best 
discussions of the principle,
56 with many telling examples both of “discrete” and of 
“geometrical” paradoxes.  Since we shall be discussing the latter in Chapter 13, we can confine ourselves here to one of the former (Keynes 1921, p. 50-1): 
Two cards, chosen from different packs, are placed face downwards on the table; one is taken up 
and found to be of a black suit: what is the chance that the other is black also?  One would naturally reply that the chance is even.  But this is based on the supposition ... that every “constitution” is 
equally probable, i.e. that each individual card is as likely to be black as red.  ... The alternative theory assumes that there are three equal possibilities – one of each colour, both black, both red.  ... The chance of the second’s being black is therefore 2/3.  The Principle of Indifference has nothing 
to say against either solution.  Until some further criterion has been proposed ... a preference for 
either hypothesis is totally arbitrary. 
                                                
56 Others that are particularly interesting include Lucas (1970) chapter VII, Blackburn (1973) 
chapter 6, Benenson (1984) chapters VI and VII, and Van Fraasen (1989) chapter 12. 145 
 Keynes himself develops a more rigorous version of the principle, designed to avoid 
this sort of problem: 
There must be no relevant  evidence relating to one alternative, unless there is corresponding  
evidence relating to the other; our relevant evidence, that is to say, must be symmetrical with 
regard to the alternatives, and must be applicable to each in the same manner.  ... 
 This rule can be expressed more precisely in symbolic language.  ... The Principle of 
Indifference is applicable to the alternatives φ(a) and φ(b), when the evidence h is so constituted 
that, if f(a) is an independent part of h which is relevant to φ(a), and does not contain any 
independent parts which are irrelevant to φ(a), then h includes f(b) also. 
Given this careful and narrow formulation of the Principle of Indifference, it is hard to 
see how anyone in the Classical/Logical Relation tradition could object to it and still have anything left to enable the theory to get off the ground.  In line with the “benefit of the doubt” policy which informs my attitude to the logical theory throughout Part II (as explained in §8.3), I too shall therefore raise no objection to Keynes’ principle.
57 
Our preliminaries are now completed, and it is time to move on to the main 
business of Part II of the thesis – refuting the would-be refuters of Hume! 
                                                
57 Nor, for the same reason, shall I raise other general objections to the logical theory, despite their 
historical prominence in discussions of induction and probability.  Aside from inconsistencies involving 
the Principle of Indifference, and Goodman’s Paradox, perhaps the best-known such general objection is the one repeatedly urged by Ayer (e.g. 1957, 1979), who argues that the relational nature of logical probability makes a mystery of why beliefs should be based on complete rather than partial evidence when both are supposedly capable of yielding a probabilis tic relation to the hypothesis in question.  This 
objection has anyway been answered by Good (1967), who neatly explains how what Carnap called the 
“Principle of Total Evidence” can be shown to maximise expected utility. 146 
 147 
 Chapter 10   Seekin g the Individual 
Probability of Future Events 
10.1 Introduction:  Future Events versus 
Continuing Uniformity 
Attempts to justify induction probabilistically naturally fall into two main types.  The 
first pursues a strategy of attempting to infer, with probabilistic support, that future individual events  will be of a similar kind to those that have gone before.  The second 
is more global, and instead proceeds by trying to show that the general uniformities  we 
have hitherto experienced are likely to continue, at least for the immediate future.  In this chapter I shall deal with the first type of justification, including arguments by De Finetti, D.C. Williams and Stove.  Apart from points that arise in connection with De Finetti’s theorem (which has been very little discussed in the philosophical literature), this discussion will be fairly brief, because many of the main points are generally familiar and quite straightforward.
58  In the next chapter, however, I shall 
begin a three-part examination of the alternative “continuing uniformity” approaches, which seem to open far more varied and more promising avenues of justification, but 
                                               
 
58 Arguments of this type, going back to Laplace, have long been a staple of critical discussions of 
“inverse probability”.  See the references in the last footnote to §10.2 below for examples. 148 
 which have hitherto been relatively little discussed (and never, as far as I am aware, 
within any sort of systematic framework). 
10.1 Bernoullian Trials and the Law of Large 
Numbers 
Most of the attempts to justify induction with which we are concerned in this chapter – 
those that attempt to assess directly the probability of individual future events – rely on some form of “Law of Large Numbers”.  There are several such large number laws in probability and statistical theory, some of which constitute highly specific and powerful results (the Central Limit Theorem, for example, shows that combinations of arbitrary distributions will tend to produce an overall “Normal” distribution when superimposed – a remarkable discovery).  It is enough for our purposes, however, to have available a relatively modest and more familiar large number law, which tells us not about limiting distributions , but only about much simpler limiting frequencies . 
In order to explain this law, we must use the notion of a Bernoullian Trial , (named 
in honour of James Bernoulli, who proved so much about them including this law).  A Bernoullian Trial is simply a repeated random experiment with two possible outcomes  
(often called “success” and “failure”) in which the outcome on each occasion is independent  of the outcome on every other, and in which the probability of success 
(often called “ p”, making the probability of failure “(1 – p)”) is the same on every 149 
 occasion .  The most common examples that are given of Bernoullian Trials are, of 
course, tosses of coins and rolls of dice. 
The Law of Large Numbers states the following important result about repeated 
Bernoullian Trials: 
Let S be the number of successes throughout n independent 
repetitions of a random experiment with probability p of success 
(i.e. n Bernoullian trials with probability p).  Then: 
For every ε > 0,    limP
nS
np
→∞−≥⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟=ε 0 
     a n d   limP
nS
np
→∞−<⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟=ε 1 
Put loosely, the probability that the frequency of success Sn will approach “as close 
as you like” to the probability p can be made arbitrarily close to 1 by making n large 
enough.  The more experiments are performed, the more certain it gets that the frequency will match the probability to any required degree of precision. 
This valuable law can be proved very quickly by making use of the important 
Chebyshev Inequality, which is proved in Appendix 3.  Since the proof is so short, and the result so fundamental, I shall give it here (adapted from proof given in Hogg and Craig 1965, p. 81). 150 
 First we establish the mean μ and variance σ ² of the experimental setup, taking a 
success to be result 1 and failure 0.  Clearly for individual trials μ = 1.p + 0.(1 – p) = p, 
while σ ², the expectation of the square of the difference from the mean, will therefore 
be equal to (1 – p)².p + p².(1 – p) = p.(1 – p).(1 – p + p) = p(1 – p).  If we then consider 
sequences of n trials, the mean will clearly be proportional to the number of trials, and 
because the individual trials are mutually independent, the variance will likewise be 
proportional to n.  Hence we have μ = np and σ ² = np(1 – p) for a sequence of n trials.  
Now we can proceed as follows: 
PS
np−≥⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟ε   =   ( ) PSn p n−≥ε   =   P()Sn
pp−≥−⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟ με σ1 , 
where as above μ = np  a n d  σ ² = np(1 – p).  Applying Chebyshev’s Inequality 
(alternative form) with kn p p=−εσ ()1 , we derive: 
      P()()Sn
pppp
n−≥−⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟≤−με σε 11
2 
and hence, by combining this with our earlier result: 
      P() S
nppp
n−≥⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟≤−εε1
2 
Clearly the right-hand side of this inequality can be made arbitrarily close to zero 
by increasing n sufficiently, so the result is proved. 151 
 10.2 An Inverse Law of Large Numbers? 
The Law of Large Numbers is an impressive result: in any Bernoullian sequence the 
frequency  of success will almost certainly approach the probability  of success 
arbitrarily closely if the sequence goes on long enough.  So from probabilities, frequencies can be inferred.  Such an inference is not, of course, inductive: the frequency is inferred from the given probability rather than from the past behaviour.
59  
But this would clearly have immediate relevance to induction if only the probability could be inferred from that past behaviour.  For then we could argue as follows: 
  Past behaviour   ⇒   Probability   ⇒   Future Behaviour 
And since we already have in our hands a result which seems to tell us that 
“frequencies will almost inevitably match probabilities arbitrarily closely if the sequence is long enough”, it is not at all surprising that many philosophers over the years have been very attracted by the idea of reversing the Law of Large Numbers. 
Unfortunately the reversal is far from simple.  For the only inverse inference 
method available, namely Bayes’ Theorem (and its relatives), requires for its operation prior probabilities which mere past frequencies, in the absence of further information, cannot provide.  To spell this out a little, let us suppose that we are faced with an irregular coin of unknown weight distribution, texture etc.  The coin is rigid and 
                                               
 
59 Obviously we can here ignore quibbles from any Frequency theorists who wish to claim a 
definitional connection between probability and past behaviour, for the reasons explained in §8.2. 152 
 durable, so we make the assumption that tosses of it are Bernoullian (i.e. independent 
and with constant “bias”) with unknown probability h of landing heads.  Our aim is 
then to discover the approximate value of h (for simplicity let us say to the nearest 0 ⋅1) 
by repeated tossing.  Suppose that we perform a fair number of tosses and find a 
frequency of heads of around 0 ⋅66 – how do we proceed and what can we infer? 
We have 11 hypotheses for the approximate value of the unknown h (from 0⋅0 to 
1⋅0 in intervals of 0 ⋅1).  And what certainly is true, based on combinatorial 
considerations (or to be specific, the resulting relative magnitudes of the coefficients in 
the binomial distribution), is that of these hypotheses the one most likely to result in a 
frequency of  0 ⋅66 is the hypothesis that h is approximately 0 ⋅7.  The value of h next 
most likely to result in that frequency is 0 ⋅6, and so on.  But these relationships are 
merely likelihoods  of our evidence given the various hypotheses, and we know from 
Bayes’ Theorem that such likelihoods on their own are insufficient to generate “updated” probabilities for the hypotheses in the light of the evidence.  We must have prior probabilities to work with, or no such inference can be drawn.  This point can be emphasised in the following way – suppose that the experiment above were carried out, say, 50 times with a very slightly bent coin: would we conclude after 33 heads that the 
probability of heads with that coin is 0 ⋅66?  I do not think so, because we would 
consider it most improbable that a coin which is only slightly bent could skew the 
usually balanced probabilities so much.  We might well conclude that the coin was biased to some degree, and we would no doubt grow to favour this hypothesis more and more if after 100 tosses, 200 tosses (etc) the frequency of heads remained high.  Perhaps it would not be so very long before we indeed came to believe that the 153 
 probability of heads was really as high as the evidence initially suggested, but if so, this 
would merely indicate that we did not from the start consider the hypothesis of such a bias to be  so very improbable. 
The general rule, then, is that we can infer probabilities from frequencies only if 
we are able to put into the Bayesian equations prior probabilities for the hypotheses 
that we are attempting to assess (i.e. the hypotheses of bias, which are in a sense 
“probabilities of probabilities” though that way of putting it is liable to raise metaphysical hackles
60).  Laplace notoriously attempted to make up for the lack of 
prior probabilities here by appealing to the Principle of Indifference across the entire 
possible range of bias from 0 ⋅0 to 1⋅0, and thus derived his famous “Rule of 
Succession”.  Since this is very familiar in the literature,61 and such uses of the 
Principle of Indifference seem highly dubious (they do not get close to satisfying Keynes’ criterion in §9.5, for example), I shall not discuss this further here but will instead move on to what has recently been considered by those few who have alluded to it to be a far more promising attempt to fill the gap. 
                                               
 
60 For example from Von Wright (1957) p. 114:  “The unknown of the problem ... is not a 
probability.  It is the presence of certain conditions, relative to which the event has a probability.  The 
‘inverse problem’ in all its variations can be described as a problem of re-identification of the conditions under which an event has occurred, these conditions constituting a ‘field of measurement’ (data, information) of the event’s probability.” 
61 See for example Broad (1928), Keynes (1921) chapter 30, Kneale (1949a) pp. 201-7 and Von 
Wright (1957) pp. 102-17. 154 
 10.3 De Finetti’s Theorem on Exchangeable Events 
We have seen that “inverse inference” of probabilities from frequencies is problematic 
unless we are able to provide appropriate prior probabilities for the various relevant “hypotheses of bias”.  From the Classical/Logical Relation perspective on probability, “appropriate” here must mean having some secure rational foundation, and we have seen that this renders the inverse inference somewhat dubious.  However from the Personalist perspective the provision of prior probabilities is no difficulty at all – they can simply be drawn from introspection.  Hence if it were possible to derive some equivalent to the Law of Large Numbers from the Personalist point of view, this might open the way to a legitimate method of inverse inference from frequencies to probabilities and, of course, ultimately back again:  induction might after all be given some foundation based on an inversion of the Law of Large Numbers. 
Before proceeding with this line of thought, however, some further preparation is 
necessary, because the notion of a Bernoullian sequence of independent events with a fixed but unknown probability is clearly problematic from a Personalist viewpoint.  As far as the Personalist in concerned, each event in the sequence has its own particular personal probability, no doubt in each case the same, but if the Personalist indeed considers the events to be parts of a repeated and inductively connected sequence, then these probabilities will certainly not be independent  for him in the classical sense – 
otherwise all learning from experience would become impossible. 155 
 De Finetti accordingly defines the important notion of exchangeability , to serve as 
a Personalist substitute for independence.  Briefly, a sequence of events is considered to be exchangeable if the person concerned views success in any one of them as just as likely as in any other, and any n-fold combination of results to be just as likely as any 
other n-fold combination that contains a similar number of successes and failures (let 
us call this “ n-exchangeability ”).  Based on these apparently meagre resources, De 
Finetti proves a remarkable theorem which provides the Personalist with his own “law of large numbers” – a theorem that shows how, on pain of inconsistency, personalist probabilities about sequences of events viewed as exchangeable must inevitably conform to the sort of inverse inference which Laplace aspired to vindicate. 
Since I am not aware of any existing presentation of De Finetti’s mathematical 
reasoning which is accessible to the non-specialist, it is perhaps worth spelling out fully his proof of his “law of large numbers”.
62  Suppose we have a sequence of random 
quantities X i that are 1-exchangeable and 2-exchangeable, with the following 
expectations (and where m2 ≠ μ2): 
 E(X i) = m1  (i.e. the expected value of X i is m1 irrespective of the value of i) 
 E(X i2) = μ2  (i.e. the expected value of X i2 is μ2 irrespective of the value of i) 
 E(X iXj) = m2  (i.e. the expected value of X iXj is m2 for any i, j where i ≠ j) 
                                                
62 De Finetti (1937) pp. 124-5.  Braithwaite (1957) and Jeffrey (1983) chapter 12 give nice (and 
quite different) explanations of the significance of the theorem on exchangeable events, but neither contains any of the relevant mathematics.  De Finetti himself is comprehensible with effort, but 
combines a somewhat roundabout prose style with an extremely terse mathematical style. 156 
 Note that it is unnecessary to assume any more than this 1-exchangeability and 
2-exchangeability in order to prove the theorem (e.g. we need not stipulate that E(X
iXjXk) also has a constant value, which would be required for 3-exchangeability). 
 Now suppose we have two sets of these random quantities, which may or may not 
overlap.  One of the sets contains h such quantities (which we can refer to for 
convenience as H 1 to H h) and the other contains k of them (K 1 to K k).  Suppose that r of 
the quantities are common to both sets (so that each of these r individual quantities has 
three  possible designations –  i.e. X a, H b and K c for suitable values of a, b and c – but 
the ambiguity does not matter). 
 Let us refer to the mean of these sets as H and K respectively.  Then we have 
   H  =  1
hi
i1h
H
=∑    K  =  1
ki
i1k
K
=∑  
However it will be convenient to be able to write such “ Σ” sums without inserting 
limits, so in what follows, an expression such as H∑i will be taken to denote the sum 
of all the H i (i.e. from i = 1 to h),  H H∑ij the sum of all the H iHj where i ≠ j, and 
likewise the corresponding formulae for K (with k replacing h).  H K∑ij will denote 
simply the sum of all the H i Kj for  i = 1 to h and j = 1 to k (for obvious reasons there is 
no requirement in this case that  i ≠ j). 
In these terms, De Finetti’s statement (1937, p. 124) of what we are attempting to 
prove is as follows: 157 
 The “law of large numbers” consists of the following property:  if H and K are respectively the 
averages of h and of k random quantities Xi (the two averages may or may not contain some terms 
in common), the probability that | H – K  | > ε (where ε > 0) may be made as small as we wish by 
taking h and k sufficiently large ;  this follows immediately from the calculation of the mathematical 
expectation of (H – K) ². 
We now proceed accordingly, and using the notation explained above, to calculate the 
expectation of (H – K)2, which we will express as “E ((H – K)2)”.  We start by deriving 
a formula for  (H – K)2, and then calculate the expectation of each of that formula’s 
components before combining these together. 
(H – K)2  = ()Hi
h∑2
2 + ()Ki
k∑2
2 – 2HKij
hk∑ 
   =  HH Hii j
h2
22+∑∑ + KK Kii j
k2
22+∑∑ – 2HKij
hk∑ 
To find the expectation of each of the  “ Σ” sums, we note that H ∑i2 has h terms and 
K∑i2 has k terms, each term having expectation μ2;  H H∑ij has h(h – 1)/2 terms 
and K K∑ij has  k(k – 1)/2 terms, each term having expectation m2;  and H K∑ij 
has hk term s, of which r (those where the H-quantity and the K-quantity are one and 
the same) have expectation μ2, while the remaining ( hk – r) have expectation m2. 158 
  Thus we have: 
E((H – K)2) = hh h m
hμ22
21+−() + kk k m
kμ22
21+−() – 2rh k r m
hkμ22+−() 
  =  μ22 2+−hm m
h + μ22 2+−km m
k – 2hkm r m
hk22 2+−()μ 
  =  k hkm km h hkm hm hkm r m
hkμ μ μ22 2 22 2 2 2 2 22 +− + +−−−−()  
  =  ()() ( )hk hk m r m
hk+− + −− μ μ22 2 2 2 = hk r
hk+−2()μ22−m 
  =  112
22hkr
hkm +−⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟−()μ  ≤ 11
22hkm +⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟−()μ  
and as required, we see that the expectation of (H – K)2 can be made as small as we 
please by taking sufficiently large values of h and k.  How exactly does his law of large 
numbers “follow immediately” from this result?  De Finetti leaves this part of the proof for his reader to fill in, but it is a consequence of the famous 
Chebyshev’s Inequality , 
which can be expressed as follows:63 
                                                
63 To remind the reader who wishes to go all the way back to first principles, a proof of 
Chebyshev’s Inequality, which is itself extremely neat, is given in Appendix 3. 159 
  Let X be any random variable with mean μ and variance σ ².  Then for any t > 0, 
   P (| X – μ  | ≥ t) ≤ σ2
2t 
If we consider (H – K) as our “random variable” here, then its mean will be 0 
(obviously the expectation of H and K will be the same, namely m1, since they are both 
averages of exchangeable X i which themselves have expectation m1) and its variance – 
the expectation of the square of the difference from the mean – will therefore be 
E([(H – K) – 0] ²) = E((H – K)2) as calculated above.  Hence combining Chebyshev’s 
Inequality with that result, together with the obvious inequality P( α > ε) ≤ P(α ≥ ε), it 
follows immediately that: 
   P (| H – K  | > ε) ≤ 11
222
hkm +⎛
⎝⎜⎞
⎠⎟−()με for any ε > 0 
and as De Finetti states, this probability can be made as small as one pleases by giving 
h and k sufficiently high values.  Hence his “law of large numbers” is indeed proved. 
10.4 What Has De Finetti Proved? 
There is no doubt that De Finetti’s law of large numbers is an important result.  Ian 
Hacking, in his review of the volume in which the relevant essay (“La Prévision: ses Lois Logiques, ses Sources Subjectives”, 1937) first became conveniently available in English, speaks of it in glowing terms: 160 
 De Finetti proves that when a man [a florist, in Hacking’s example] thinks of events as 
exchangeable and conducts experiments he will form the same expectations about next year’s crop 
as if he had postulated statistical independence, and long run frequencies, and used the Bayesian theory of inference.  One had thought of statistical independence as a physical property of some part of the world, and as an essential core to statistical inference.  De Finetti has proved it de trop .  
This is the first successful philosophical reduction in the whole turbid history of reductionism. 
  (Hacking 1966, p. 339) 
Thus De Finetti has shown that Personalism can combine the standard resources of 
traditional statistics with its own great strength: the simple and uncontroversial provision of prior probabilities.  Or so it appears.  On this basis De Finetti himself has claimed to have solved the problem of induction, and others have claimed it on his behalf.
64  We must now examine how such a solution might work. 
De Finetti’s theorem, as applied to the case of inverse inference regarding 
exchangeable events, is a paradigm of the Personalist inferential strategy that I described in §8.2.  The general idea is that in the case of a sequence of events judged to be exchangeable, the Personalist can start with 
almost any  prior distribution of 
“subjective” probabilities and conditional probabilities, as long as these satisfy the constraints of exchangeability.  Then as the experimental results come in, the Bayesian   
                                               
 
64 See for example De Finetti (1937) p. 147, De Finetti (1970) vol. 2 p. 201, Zabell (1985) pp. 157-
9, Hill (1988) p. 211.  See also Jeffrey (1986) for a related treatment of induction, though his discussion 
is more balanced and his claims less optimistic than De Finetti’s. 161 
 inferences they provoke, and the constant constraints of exchangeability, will together 
gradually mould that distribution into one that reflects the observed frequency of the events in the sequence.  Eventually, if he is consistent, the Personalist will end up making predictions that conform precisely to what would be expected from the Objectivist who all along has taken the events to be indicative of a genuine underlying 
physical propensity. 
There are, however, some problems.  First, it should be noted that De Finetti’s 
argument goes through only if 
μ2 (i.e. the expected value of X i2) and m2 (i.e. the 
expected value of X iXj where i ≠ j) are distinct.  If the two are the same, then we have 
not mere exchangeability but genuine full-blooded independence, and in that case no 
amount of Bayesian updating can make any difference to the relevant expectations.  So for De Finetti’s argument to get a grip, the person concerned must already be favourably disposed, albeit perhaps only marginally, towards the idea that the various X’s are evidentially connected together.  The radical Humean who feels confident that no such connection exists will be left quite unaffected by De Finetti’s reasoning. 
Secondly, and more generally, it does not seem to be inevitable that even the non-
sceptical Personalist must end up adjusting his beliefs in the way that De Finetti describes.  Certainly what he says is true regarding the logical structure of the synchronic system of exchangeable prior probabilities and conditional probabilities with which the consistent Personalist starts his reasoning.  But as Hacking famously pointed out in 1967 (pp. 314-6), there is in fact no obvious inconsistency in the Personalist’s updating his beliefs, when he does so, by some method other than Bayesian conditioning: 162 
 The idea of the [Personalist Bayesian] model of learning is that Prob(h/e)  represents one’s personal 
probability [for h] after one learns e.  But formally the conditional probability represents no such 
thing.  If, as in all of Savage’s work, conditional probability is a defined notion, then Prob(h/e)  
stands merely for the quotient of two probabilities.  It in no way represents what I have learned after I take e as a new datum point.  It is only when we make the dynamic assumption that we can 
conclude anything about learning from experience.  To state the dynamic assumption we use 
probability given data, as opposed to conditional probability. 
  (p. 315) 
Hacking’s “dynamic” assumption is precisely the assumption that if I start out with a 
(personal) conditional probability P( h | e) – shown behaviourally by my willingness to 
lay appropriate conditional bets – and I then learn e, I must inevitably end up ascribing 
that same value to my updated (personal) probability for h.  Not only is this not 
logically required, as Hacking emphasises, but indeed instances have been produced in subsequent discussions that show how such updating can even be irrational.
65  O n e  
relevant point here, commonly made against Personalist Bayesianism, is that it is in principle no more rational for the Personalist to apply Bayes’ Theorem “forwards” than it is to apply it “backwards” – to work out an appropriate prior probability function after the event, so as to deliver the updated probability which he finds most plausible.  Even many Personalists are happy to accept this view.  Good, for example, strongly recommends the imaginary contemplation of possible outcomes, 
and of what one’s 
        
                                                
65 Earman (1992) pp.46-51 and Howson (1995) pp. 7-10 briefly sketch the debate on Bayesian 
conditioning, while Bacchus, Kyburg and Thalos (1990)  provide a strong anti-Bayesian contribution to 
it.  Two useful discussions that recently appeared together are Howson (1996) and Castell ( 1996). 163 
 beliefs would then become , as an excellent method of rendering one’s prior 
probabilities sharper and more appropriate – he calls this the “device of imaginary results” (e.g. Good 1950, p. 35). 
In a different context, Good has produced a nice example against De Finetti (in a 
discussion of De Finetti 1969).  He imagines our watching a coin-tossing machine, 
producing a sequence of tosses that we, in accordance with De Finetti, initially 
consider to be exchangeable: 
... if by chance we happened to get the sequence 
 010101010101010101010101010101010101010101010101, 
we would, if we were rational and had not done a very long preliminary sequence of trials, judge the (subjective) probability that the next digit would be a zero as well over 1/2.  But this would be an admission that we would not strictly accept the postulate of exchangeability or permutability even before we did any experimentation. 
(Good 1969, p. 21) 
If the dynamic assumption is dubious it is not clear that Good’s final sentence here is 
correct.  But whether it is or not, he seems to be on target with De Finetti.  In the context of our discussion, moreover, his point can be developed.  Suppose that the coin tossing machine were to produce as output: 
 000000000000000000000000000000000000011111111111 
Surely we would strongly suspect that things had changed – that they were not now going on as they did to start with.  Moreover in any inductive situation at all, this sort of change can easily be imagined (as Hume himself was fond of emphasising).  The very fact that we would in such a case see ordering as a relevant consideration again164 
 casts serious doubt on whether we would ever in practice consider a sequence of events 
to be literally exchangeable, or even if we did so initially, that we would then persist in Bayesian conditioning on that basis in the teeth of such evidence. 
In accounting for why the “dynamic assumption” of Personalism had previously 
been overlooked, Hacking indicates how the older theories of probability might have 
made it hard to see: “This assumption is not a tautology for personalism.  It is a 
tautology for theories like Harold Jeffreys’, where a unique probability is associated with any pair 
h, e.” (1967, p. 314).  So the Personalist can be seen as trying to have his 
cake and eat it – to take advantage of the objectivity conferred on conditional probabilities within the Classical/Logical Relationist tradition, while importing in his own entirely subjective (and to that extent “unaccountable”) prior probabilities.  De Finetti cannot have it both ways, and therefore he has not succeeded in establishing as strong a result, in its relevance to induction, as he had imagined. 
Another reason for doubting whether De Finetti has progressed very far beyond 
the old impasse of inverse inference is implicitly suggested by Good, when he points out a moral to be drawn from his earlier example of the coin-tossing machine: 
It seems to me that you would not accept the [exchangeability] postulate unless you already had the 
notion of physical probability and statistical independence at the back of your mind. 
... I do not see how De Finetti would, without undue complexity, express the statement that [in the 
case of the coin-tossing machine] ‘ really  the trials are physically independent although we do not 
know  that they are’. 
  (Good 1969, pp. 21-2) 165 
 If De Finetti depends upon background assumptions of real physical propensities and 
independence to explain the exchangeable patterns of beliefs from which his theory takes off, then as far as the justification of induction is concerned, we are no further forward.  No matter what my initial exchangeable beliefs may be, if assumptions of physical independence lie behind them then I am in exactly the same boat as the 
traditional Objectivist.  And in so far as the evidence leads him to change his beliefs 
about the underlying physical basis of what happens, so I shall modify my beliefs for the same reason, not in accordance with my original assumption of exchangeability, but on the basis of how things now, in the light of what has happened, seem to me.  Consistency 
at a time  is an important virtue for any reasoner – rigid consistency over 
time can be simply a sign of obstinacy. 
10.5 Williams and Stove 
Before concluding this chapter, we must briefly consider one other attempt to 
justify induction by predicting individual future probabilities, but which attempts to do so without relying on any sort of problematic “inverse inference”, whether Classical or Personalist.  Instead Donald Williams (1947 chapter 4, 1953), followed by Stove (1986 chapter VI), aims to defend induction using a quite different form of “large number law” – one based on purely combinatorial considerations rather than probabilistic.  Williams is emphatic that his argument relies only on “direct” probabilistic inference, typified by the “proportional syllogism”: 166 
    mn of P’s are Q’s 
   a is a P 
  ∴ there is a  probability of mn that a is a Q 
which “directly” derives a population probability from a population frequency 
(evidently something he and Stove find unexceptionable), rather than attempting an “inverse” argument using Bayes’ Theorem to infer a population probability from the frequency in a mere sample.  To justify induction, it is of course necessary in the end to vindicate some such form of inference from sample to population, but Williams finds an ingenious way to bridge this gap using only “direct” methods, by formulating a large number law based on 
populations of samples  rather than populations of 
individuals. 
The Williams/Stove large number law can be explained as follows.  Suppose that 
we wish to discover what proportion of the individuals, within some large population of 
P’s (say, one million or more in total), are also Q’s, and let us suppose that this 
unknown proportion q% lies somewhere between 1% and 99%.  Now imagine that we 
are about to select a sample of 10,000 P’s from that population (Williams calls such a 
sample “myriadic”), and consider all the different ways in which this could be done (i.e. all the possible constitutions that such a sample could have).  Clearly there is a vast number of such possible samples, some of which will contain all 
Q’s and some of 
which will contain none (since our stipulations imply that the population must contain at least 10,000 of both 
Q’s and non- Q’s), but it is a combinatorial truism that in the 
overwhelming majority of these possible samples (at least 95% of them), the 167 
 proportion s% of Q’s in the sample will match the unknown population proportion q%, 
whatever than may be, to an accuracy of plus or minus 1%.  Suppose now that we select our myriadic sample.  Williams and Stove seek to justify induction from our sample to the population by the following sort of “direct” inference: 
In respect of the proportion of 
Q’s, at least 95% of myriadic samples 
match the population from which they come to within 1%. 
  The proportion of Q’s in this myriadic sample is s%. 
∴ It is 95% probable that the proportion of Q’s in the sample is within 
1% of that in the population, i.e. that s% = q% ±1%. 
∴ It is 95% probable that the proportion of Q’s in the population is 
within 1% of that in the sample, i.e. that q% = s% ±1%. 
Williams is at great pains in his 1953 article to emphasise, against Kneale (1949b) and 
Black (1948), that the last stage of this argument is merely arithmetical rather than 
being any sort of inverse inference.  And this is certainly true.  The serious work is 
done at the previous stage, where a direct probability judgement is made that the sample probably matches the population, on the grounds that most samples do.  The argument is thus essentially a proportional syllogism, performed in respect of a population of samples. 
Williams’ argument has been criticised by a number of authors (e.g. Nelson 
(1948), W ill (1948), Strawson (1952) pp. 252-6, as well as Black and Kneale), and, 
when they have not been sidetracked by the spectre of alleged “inverse inference”, criticised quite effectively.  The essential problem is that the sort of inference from 168 
 sample to population that Williams hopes to vindicate, even if considered as a 
proportional syllogism, can be legitimate only if the sample concerned is selected randomly or in some other way “fairly”.  Nelson (1948 pp. 141-2) puts the point best: 
 For sake of argument I shall allow ... that the law of compositions, derived from the law of 
large numbers, is applicable to all populations (e.g. the class of past, present, and future events).  
This law implies that the number of approximately representative subclasses is greater than the number of all other subclasses.  But it does not imply or make probable that most of the samples we 
select  will match the population.  ... Williams fails to connect these two propositions.   To do so is 
the purpose of randomness or uniformity.  Thus in intrapolation, in which any elements of a 
population may be selected as members of the sample, the usual requirement is that the sample be 
randomly selected, in order to insure ... against a method which would make the composition of the sample a function not only of the population but also of the method.  In extrapolations, in which some elements cannot be selected, a principle of uniformity is commonly believed necessary in order that a sample may be indicative of more than itself or in order that the course of experience may be presumed to supply representative samples. 
As Nelson goes on to point out, Williams attempts to reply to this sort of objection on 
the grounds that if we have no evidence that our sample is unrepresentative, then we have no evidence to justify revising the probabilities given by the argument.  Nelson’s response is to argue that such ignorance is not enough, and a positive assurance of randomness is needed: “the very notion of evidence has indispensable conditions not satisfied by ignorance”.  But I think the fallacy of Williams’ argument can be highlighted more clearly by challenging the presupposition of his reply – for 
we do  
have evidence relevant to the question of whether the sample is unrepresentative, and we can prove that we do by considering the logic of his own combinatorial reasoning. 169 
 The point is that Williams’ argument does not fairly represent the situation when 
we make an inductive inference:  in such cases the “sample” from which we infer is entirely confined to 
past instances, whereas the inferences we draw typically concern 
future  instances.  The relevance of this is that Williams’ large number law is derived as 
a result concerning the set of all the possible myriadic samples taken from the 
population as a whole .  As soon as the population is partitioned, and samples taken 
from a limited subset to draw inferences beyond that subset, the combinatory argument is wrecked 
even if the principle of partition is relatively arbitrary .  In the case of past 
and future, of course, we might well consider besides that the principle of partition is very far from arbitrary – we are used to the passage of time making a difference, and Williams has given us no reason to suppose that it will not do so in this case.  The most that can be claimed for his argument, therefore, is that it successfully licenses an inference from sample to population when the sample is taken randomly from the 
entire  population.  This it can indeed do, but this is not to justify induction. 
10.6 A Humean Punch Line: 
Why These Attempts Must Fail 
The point just made against Williams is a very Humean one:  for all we know things 
might change, and if all our information is garnered from the past, we seem unable in principle to obtain any evidence that such a change will not occur.  Before moving on from this chapter, it is worth pointing out how powerful this thought is, and of how wide an application. 170 
 Suppose, then, that we had been happy to accept, at the beginning of this chapter, 
that the Laplacian “inverse” inference could yield knowledge of the real probability underlying the observed frequency in a Bernoullian sequence.  Suppose still more, that such an inference, in the case of a totally 
uniform  sequence, could yield knowledge of a 
genuine natural necessity underlying the observed uniformity (such an argument was 
indeed proposed by Clark (1983) and subsequently criticised by Millican (1986)).  
What then would follow about future trials?  The answer is, surprisingly –  nothing: 
When a man says, I have found, in all past instances, such sensible qualities conjoined with such 
secret powers:  And when he says, similar sensible qualities will always be conjoined with similar 
secret powers ; he is not guilty of a tautology, nor are these propositions in any respect the same.  
You say that the one proposition is an inference from the other.  But you must confess, that the inference is not intuitive; neither is it demonstrative: Of what nature is it then?  To say it is experimental, is begging the question.  For all inferences from experience suppose, as their 
foundation, that the future will resemble the past, and that similar powers will be conjoined with 
similar sensible qualities. ... It is impossible, therefore, that any arguments from experience can prove this resemblance of the past to the future, since all these arguments are founded on the supposition of that resemblance. (E37-8 cf. T91) 
Exactly the same refutation that we saw in §4.2 works with “probability” substituted 
for “power”.  So even if the methods explored in this chapter were able to give knowledge, or probable knowledge, of past objects, we would still be unable to extend this to future objects without appealing to induction.  If we are to justify induction probabilistically, therefore, we must turn to methods which instead of focusing on individual objects or events, explicitly try to bridge the gap between past and future by considering ongoing uniformity as a hypothesis to be confirmed in its own right. 171 
 Chapter 11   Continuing Uniformity 
(a) Mackie 
11.1 The Probability of Continuing Uniformity: 
Introduction 
We have now seen enough to confirm the impossibility of justifying induction by 
consideration of the probability of individual events:  here the fundamental Humean objection – that induction must be presupposed if the behaviour of past events is to be taken as any indication regarding future events – seems to hold up extremely well even against the subtleties of De Finetti and Williams.  We must now move on to consider another range of would-be justifications, which focus not on individual events but instead on the continuing (real or apparent) uniformities which those events have manifested in the past.  The central theme of arguments of this type is the intuitively plausible idea that if a uniformity has been persisting for a long time hitherto, then this period of uniformity is unlikely to terminate in the immediate future. 
The most straightforward way of pursuing this “continuing uniformity” 
justification strategy would be: first, to establish some original prior distribution 
U(x) 
for the probability that a uniformity will last altogether for a total temporal extent x;  
secondly, to assume that the uniformity in question has already been observed to persist 172 
 for a length of time t;  and finally to combine these two data using an inverse argument 
based on Bayes’ Theorem to yield a posterior distribution D(t,p)  specifying the 
conditional probability of the uniformity’s continuing for at least a further time p, given that it has already been observed for time t
.  As might be expected in the light of 
our discussion in §§8.2-3, however, there are two possible perspectives on this 
Bayesian procedure, corresponding to the two available interpretations of probability. 
From the Personalist Bayesian  perspective, the procedure must be such as to 
justify induction more or less independently of the choice of original prior U(x).  In 
other words it must be possible to show that virtually any “reasonable” original prior, meaning any prior which is not fixed from the start to be outlandishly sceptical (by, for example, assigning probability 0 to extended uniformity) can yield a posterior distribution 
D(t,p)  that is such as to be “inductively favourable”.  There is, however, an 
obvious limitation, in that the usual Personalist trick – of relying on repeated iterations 
of Bayes’ theorem to dominate the prior distribution step-by-step and gradually force it in the desired direction – is simply not available here.  By its very nature, the “continuing uniformity” strategy appeals to just one special item of empirical evidence:  the observed duration of past uniformity.  So only one application of Bayes’ Theorem can be made, substantially depressing the prospects of success.  It should therefore come as little surprise that Mackie’s defence of induction, which is precisely in this spirit, indeed fails to achieve its goal, as we shall see later in this chapter. 
The 
Classical/Logical Relation  perspective provides more flexibility.  On the one 
hand it can make use of the straightforward Bayesian procedure discussed above, but      173 
 this time founded on an “objective” (i.e. genuinely a priori ) original prior distribution 
function U(x).  On the other hand, it can aim to appeal to independent logical 
symmetries in the inductive setup, and try by some alternative form of a priori  
reasoning to justify the claim that uniformity is likely to continue.  To the best of my knowledge the former option has never been attempted, presumably because of 
scepticism over the possibility of establishing an appropriate “objective” prior – I shall 
accordingly defer consideration of this until Chapter 13.  The latter option famously has been attempted, by Roy Harrod, and his ingenious argument (together with its later development by Simon Blackburn) will the topic of Chapter 12. 
To anticipate the conclusions of these next two chapters, both Mackie and Harrod, 
in their different ways, attempt to justify induction using the “continuing uniformity” strategy but without having to rely on any specific prior probability function 
U(x) for 
the a priori  likely extent of uniformity.  Both are motivated by scepticism about the 
possibility of establishing any such a priori  function,66 scepticism which is entirely 
understandable in the light of the well-known “paradoxes of geometrical probability”.  However both their arguments fail, and this failure indicates that if the “continuing uniformity” strategy is to succeed at all, an 
a priori  “objective” prior is indispensable.  
Hence in Chapter 13 we shall have no alternative but to take the bull by the horns and tackle the notorious paradoxes. 
                                               
 
66 Harrod is emphatic in his rejection of any such prior:  “... it has been claimed that [to show the 
validity of induction] we have to assume initial prior probabilities for certain beliefs.  All such prior 
postulates have been totally dispensed with here.” (Harrod 1956, p. vi). 174 
 11.2 A Criterion of Success 
Before embarking on our three-part examination of the “continuing uniformity” 
strategy, however, we must consider what would be a suitable criterion of success for arguments of this type.  The matter is non-trivial for at least two, complementary, reasons.  First, we shall see that unlike the arguments considered in the previous chapter (those purporting to give a means of deriving the probability of at least some individual future events), the “continuing uniformity” defences of induction do not necessarily attempt to yield more or less determinate probabilities – they may only aspire to demonstrate a general pattern of probabilification, whereby the prolonged observation of uniformity in the past makes more likely an extended continuation of uniformity into the future.  Thus if we insist that a justification of induction can count as successful only if it is able to yield determinate quantitative predictions, we shall inevitably fail to engage with these arguments. 
But secondly, if in recognition of this we adopt a more liberal approach without at 
the same time erecting some explicit alternative criterion of success, there may be a risk of accepting arguments which superficially appear to justify induction on the basis of extrapolating uniformity, and yet in fact derive any strength they possess not from such extrapolation, but instead from would-be 
a priori  and “past-independent” 
premises of very questionable legitimacy and scope.  To illustrate this point, s uppose 
that someone were to propose a justification of induction in the following manner: 175 
 Let P be any contingent proposition which at this moment happens to be true.  Then let CP(x)  be 
the a priori  probability density function for the extent of time for which P can be expected to 
remain true into the future.  Clearly CP(x)  can be non-zero only for x≥0, and although the detailed 
form of this function is unknown (for example it might well depend on the precise form of P), it 
would in general be extreme and arbitrary to assume that CP(x)  is discontinuously infinite at x=0.  
But given that CP(x)  is not discontinuously infinite at x=0, it follows that P is virtually certain to 
remain true for at least some further time. 
Could this argument, even if reasonable as far as it goes, count as a justification of 
induction?  I do not think so, because it fails to provide any substantial basis for inductive prediction.  Simply knowing that 
P is likely to remain true for some  further 
time is quite insufficient to warrant any significant use of induction – it would be consistent, for example, with the function 
CP(x)  being concentrated almost entirely 
near x=0, so that even if a non-zero prediction of P’s continuing truth were to be 
warranted initially, nevertheless an instant later the already-growing temporal extent of 
P’s truth would begin to count against  any further continuation rather than in its 
favour.  We surely cannot consider an argument to provide a justification of induction 
if it does nothing more than to justify an instantaneous  prediction of continuing 
uniformity, and thereafter provides no force in favour of induction rather than counter-induction (or any other anti-inductive policy). 
So I would propose the following criterion for any would-be “continuing 
uniformity” justification of induction.  Such a justification need not yield any quantitative probabilistic prediction about the future, but if it does not, it should at least give a basis for concluding in general that 
the longer the uniformity in question lasts, 
the longer it is likely to continue .  This would most naturally be demonstrated in one of 176 
 two ways, by showing that as the uniformity continues, either a constant prediction 
achieves a greater probability, or else that a constant probability attaches to a greater prediction.  Both these forms of the criterion will arise in what follows. 
11.3 Mackie’s Defence of Induction 
Mackie sets himself the task of justifying a prediction of general uniformity for a limited period, a prediction which can then itself be used to support other, particular inductions.  He considers first the simple pair of rival hypotheses, that the world’s ways of working are completely uniform throughout, and that they are completely random.  “If we had just these alternatives to choose between, it would be reasonable to prefer the former in the light of our observations, unless it was antecedently almost infinitely less probable than the second.” (Mackie 1979, p. 124).  And to assume that it was so vastly improbable would, Mackie says, be question-begging. 
Unfortunately, the matter is complicated by the profusion of other possible 
hypotheses, even if we accept it to be overwhelmingly probable that the world has in fact been completely uniform during the period of our past observations.  For it could be that this uniformity has a limited temporal (or spatial) range, beyond which it terminates or gradually fades out.  These hypotheses of extensive but limited order have yet to be dealt with, and Mackie’s central argument is directed to this purpose: 
First let us consider the indefinitely large set of hypotheses all of which assign the same spatio-
temporal extent to uniformity, but locate it differently ....  It seems a legitimate application of the 177 
 principle of indifference to assign equal antecedent probab ilities to the various hypotheses of this 
set.  Some of them, however, will have been ruled out by the already-observed spread of 
uniformity.  ... Then, of the hypotheses not so ruled out, if the extent which is common to the hypotheses of the set ... is considerably greater than the observed spread of uniformity, relatively few will say that uniformity will terminate either at once or very soon ....  So, taking the non-yet ruled-out hypotheses of the set as equally probable, we can conclude that, even if uniformity lasts 
only for this limited extent, it is not likely to end very soon.  But, secondly, let us consider the set 
of sets of such hypotheses ....  Clearly, the shorter the extent characteristic of each set of hypotheses, the smaller the proportion of the hypotheses of that set that will cover the observed spread of uniformity ....  Consequently, by an inverse probability argument the observation of ... a certain spread of uniformity raises the probability that the extent of uniformity is considerably greater than that spread much more than it raises the probability that that extent is equal to or only a 
little greater than that spread.  Now, ... we can appeal to a ... principle of tolerance to justify our not 
giving a zero antecedent probab ility to all hypotheses assigning more than a certain extent to 
uniformity.  So long as the greater-extent hypotheses are not ruled out by such an unfair initial assignment, they can come out more probable in the end, their probability being raised more by the observation of some considerable spread of uniformity.  And, as we have seen, once we have confirmed such a greater-extent hypothesis, we can go on by a direct probability argument to infer 
that the uniformity is not likely to end very soon. 
  (Mackie 1979, pp. 125-6) 
Mackie’s informal presentation of his argument seems very persuasive and plausible, 
and to appreciate its difficulties we shall have to examine it mathematically. 178 
 11.4 The Mathematics of Mackie’s Argument 
To commence our analysis, let us assume that one of Mackie’s hypotheses of limited 
order is correct, and that we have already observed uniformity for a length of time t, 
predicting that it will continue for a further time p.  Now if U(x) is the probability 
density function representing the initial probability that uniformity will extend over a total time 
x, then since, by the Principle of Indifference (which Mackie endorses), all 
hypotheses assigning an equal extent to uniformity are equally probable, it follows that the probability that uniformity is of duration 
x and begins at some point within a certain 
interval of time i is proportional both to U(x) and to i, say kiU(x) , where k is some 
constant.67  With this information, we wish to find the probability that uniformity will 
continue for at least a further time p, fulfilling our prediction to that effect. 
Consider the set of hypotheses whose characteristic extent ( x + t) exceeds the 
observed spread of uniformity t by a time x (where x > p): 
                                                
67 For the sake of representing Mackie’s argument as faithfully as possible, we must here put to one 
side certain complications arising from questions about the finitude or infinitude of time itself.  For if 
time is finite, then the extent of uniformity must presumably “fit inside” that finite period, which would 
complicate our simple kiU(x)  formula owing to edge effects.  But on the other hand, if time is infinite, 
then on a standard “proper” interpretation of probability functions, the value of the constant k must 
inevitably be zero, making nonsense of the cancellation by k in the mathematics that follows.  In brief 
defence of Mackie’s form of argument we can note:  first, that in such an a priori  argument the 
assumption of an infinite space of possibilities for temporal extent seems the more appropriate;  and secondly, that precisely because k does cancel out in the subsequent mathematics, we have here a typical 
situation in which the use of an “improper” initial probability density function is considered by many 
theoretical statisticians to be quite acceptable (see also §§13.2 and 13.5 below). 179 
                                                                         (observed)      (predicted) 
                                                                                t                     p 
                                                                                            1 
                                                                                                          2 
                                                                                                                                                        3 
         p                          x – p                                                                                x 
                                 x                                                                        x + t 
 A            B                                           C                               D          E                                            F 
 
Lines 1, 2 and 3 represent three possible uniformities of duration ( x + t), all of which 
account for the observed uniformity CD of length t.  Uniformity 1 ends immediately 
at D, 2 continues for a further time p, while 3, which began at C, the time of our first 
observation, finishes at F after a hitherto unobserved time x.  There is, then, a range of 
possible uniformities of the given duration ( x + t) that are consistent with our 
observations: they all start at different points within the period AC, and of these, the uniformities starting within the period BC will yield successful predictions.  As Mackie says, the proportion (
x – p)/x (i.e. BC/AC) of successful predictions will grow 
considerably as x is increased.  In addition – Mackie’s second point – a greater value of 
x will bring a greater range x (i.e. AC) of possible (starting points for) uniformities, and 
we can therefore use an inverse probability argument to confirm those hypotheses involving a large value of 
x, at the expense of those involving a smaller value. 
For any particular  value of x, the initial probability of a uniformity of extent ( x + t) 
which will cover the observed spread of uniformity t is kx U(x +  t)⋅ .  So the initial 180 
 probability of a uniformity of any extent which will cover this spread is equal to the 
sum of the function kx U(x +  t)⋅  for all possible values of x from zero to infinity – that 
is, kx U ( x  +  t ) d x⋅∞∫0.  In this sum, the multiplication by x will give greater weight to 
U(x + t) for larger values of x, and this is the basis of Mackie’s inverse probability 
argument.  But it should be noted that this weighting is quite independent of t – no 
matter how much uniformity is observed, the probability that total uniformity will last for a period which exceeds observed uniformity by an excess time 
x is raised, on 
account of that observation, in proportion to x alone. 
Let us now move on from Mackie’s inverse probability argument to his direct 
probability argument.  As we have seen, if total uniformity exceeds observed uniformity by a time 
x, then the probability of a successful prediction to the effect that 
uniformity will continue for a time p (where x > p) is ( x – p)/x.  But again, this value is 
completely independent of t – the probability in no way improves as our observation of 
uniformity continues.  So neither part of Mackie’s argument can justify at all taking the past as a rule for the future, for if the past is to be a rule for the future, then in accordance with our criterion developed in §11.2 above, at the very least a greater observed regularity must give greater strength to a constant prediction.  And Mackie’s reasoning here makes no mention of the extent of the observed regularity: “
t” appears 
only in the argument-place of the function U(x), which he does not discuss. 181 
 11.5 Satisfying the Criterion 
If induction is to be justified by some method such as Mackie’s, then this will depend 
crucially on the behaviour of the function U(x).  We can establish the condition for 
such a justification using Bayes’ theorem in its simplest form: 
 P( h/e)  =  P( e & h) / P( e) 
Our  “evidence” e is the observed uniformity t, while the predicted “hypothesis” h is a 
spread of uniformity covering both the observed time t and the predicted time p.  In 
this case, then, the initial probability of both “evidence” and “hypothesis” – P( e & h) – 
is equal to the initial probability of the “hypothesis” alone, since any example of the latter must be an example of the former as well. 
As we worked out above, the initial probability of the observed uniformity 
t is 
kx U ( x  +  t ) d x⋅∞∫0.  So by exactly parallel reasoning, the initial probability of the 
observed and predicted uniformity ( t + p) is kx U ( x  +  t p ) d x⋅+∞∫0.  Applying Bayes’ 
theorem, we therefore reach the following result: 
  Probability of a successful prediction 
   =  kx U ( x  +  t p ) d xkx U ( x  +  t ) d x⋅+ ⋅∞∞∫∫00 
   =  x U ( x  + t p )d x x U ( x  + t )d x⋅+ ⋅∞∞∫∫00 182 
 To satisfy our criterion for showing the past to be a rule for the future, this probability 
must grow as t increases.  This condition will be fulfilled if U(x + p)/U(x) is an 
increasing function of x;68  but this is hardly surprising, since that is essentially the 
same condition required by Bayes’ theorem if it is to be the case that the longer a regularity goes on, the greater the chance of its continuing for a further time 
p.69  
Clearly, to claim that this is so is to beg the very question at issue: to assume that the 
past is a rule for the future. 
11.6 The Incompleteness of Mackie’s Argument 
Mackie’s defence of induction is incomplete because he considers only the two possibilities, that the past is 
some  positive rule for the future in respect of the 
maintenance of uniformity, and that the world is “totally random”.  He can then claim, apparently quite reasonably, that a dogmatic assumption of randomness would be extreme and arbitrary, and that we must accordingly “allow from the start that there is some better-than-zero probability of some not purely random pattern” (Mackie 1979,      
                                               
 
68 Since in that case the functions U(x + t + p) and U(x + t) provide a more favourable ratio as t gets 
larger while at the same time the minimum arguments for which they are evaluated – i.e. when x = 0, 
giving minimum arguments of ( t + p) and t respectively – increase, thus excluding those lower valued 
arguments which would provide a less favourable ratio. 
69 Strictly, Bayes’ theorem yields the condition that U(x) dx U(x) dx
tp t+∞∞∫∫ b e an inc reasing  
function of t, but subject to appropriate regularity conditions this comes to the same thing. 183 
 pp. 126-7).  In the terms of our discussion above, Mackie assumes that either 
U(x + p)/U(x) is an increasing function (i.e. that the longer a regularity goes on, the 
longer it is likely to continue) or that it is constant (i.e. that the past history of a regularity has no effect whatever on its future – his talk here of “pure randomness” which makes it sound so extreme and singular is misleading, because any probability 
density function of the form 
Ux a eax()=− will yield this result, and this sort of “null” 
hypothesis of independence between past and future can hardly be considered 
arbitrarily  extreme).  But nothing that Mackie has said has in any way ruled out the 
possibility that U(x + p)/U(x) should be a decreasing (or even an oscillating) function – 
and if this cannot be done, then his argument cannot succeed. 
To sum up, Mackie aspires to justify induction without being required to consider 
in detail the prior probability density function U(x) that his reasoning implicitly 
presupposes – he presumes that it will be sufficient for his purposes merely to rule out extreme and dogmatically anti-inductive candidates for that function by appeal to a minimal “principle of tolerance”.  However this is far from being the case:  Mackie’s argument just translates the old problem of justifying inductive predictions into the new one of establishing an “inductively favourable” probability function, and mathematical analysis demonstrates that his principle of tolerance is far too weak to give any assistance in finding a solution.  Any initial appearance to the contrary is perhaps due to the way in which his lucid informal presentation conceals its fundamental flaw under the veil of an equivocation on what counts as confirmation of hypotheses of “a greater extent of uniformity” – this phrase has a crucially different significance depending on whether it is interpreted as meaning a greater extent of 
total uniformity, or a greater 184 
 extent of unobserved  uniformity, and it is perfectly possible for the one to be confirmed 
while the other is not.  Thus although it is indeed obviously true within Mackie’s probabilistic framework that as 
observed  uniformity continues ever longer, this will 
inevitably raise the probability of a longer total uniformity, it does not follow at all that 
the probability of a certain length p of unobserved  uniformity will be likewise raised.  
For if the unobserved  component of the prediction is held constant, then as the 
observed length t is increased, so also the total predicted length ( t + p) will also be 
increased – the total prediction is not constant, and any additional confirmation 
conferred on the new longer prediction by comparison with the previous shorter one has therefore to be derived from the asymptotic behaviour of the function 
U(x) rather 
than from the sort of general argument that Mackie provides.  Hence Mackie’s aspiration, to justify induction probabilistically using Bayes’ theorem but without specific consideration of initial probabilities, cannot be fulfilled.
70 
                                                
70 The argument of this chapter is based on Millican (1982), on the draft of which John Mackie 
kindly commented prior to publication.  He agreed that the mathematical analysis provided a faithful 
representation of his reasoning, and generously conceded that he could see no answer to it apart from the possibility of appealing to some sort of logico-pragmatic justification for presupposing an inductively favourable prior probability function U(x).  He also suggested two possible approaches along these lines, 
which I accordingly discussed in Section II of the published paper – unfortunately they encounter analogous problems to those that beset the traditional “pragmatic” justification of induction, as explained 
in §7.5 above, and can be shown to fail for very similar reasons. 185 
 Chapter 12   Continuing Uniformity 
(b) Harrod and Blackburn 
12.1 Harrod’s Initial Argument, and an Objection 
Harrod first presented his ingenious justification of induction in the article “Induction 
and Probability” (1951), and further developed it in his book Foundations of Inductive 
Logic  (1956).  However the central idea, on his own account, dates back to an article 
on memory that he published in Mind  in 1942:71 
 “The principle for which I argue can only be established by reference to the general nature of 
the universe.  Of this in a certain sense we know nothing a priori .  It might be a Heracleitean flux 
through and through, or it might be uniform through and through, or it might be any form of 
admixture.  But suppose that it were possible to discover by experience that it was not Heracleitean through and through, would anything follow?  Let us suppose that by experience it was discovered 
                                                
71 It seems possible that Mackie’s approach was also inspired by this thought of Harrod’s, for he 
begins his discussion with a strikingly similar dichotomy between uniformity and randomness, and 
pursues the same objective.  Moreover his method of argument can be seen as an attempt to follow through Harrod’s central idea (that one is a priori  unlikely to be on the extreme edge of any local 
uniformity), but in a way that enables the crucial probabilistic conclusion to be inferred using a direct “time-symmetrical” application of the Principle of Indifference, avoiding the asymmetries that as we shall see ultimately undermine Harrod’s own thought experiment (notably the fact that one has 
experienced only the current uniformity’s past, while making a prediction about its future) . 186 
 to have certain stable elements in some part of it.  ... Now, if contact has been made with certain 
stable fragments, it is improbable at any time that one is on the extreme edge of those fragments.  
Whatever their size, it is much more probable that one is at some distance from the edge.” (quoted in Harrod 1956, p. xii) 
His principal argument is essentially an attempt to flesh out mathematically this central 
idea, that if uniformity has characterised our experience hitherto, it is very unlikely that the current “fragment” of stability, whatever its absolute extent, is just about to end.  In his book, he introduces the argument as follows: 
“We are starting, as we must in a fundamental analysis of induction, from a condition of total 
nescience.  Before having made any inductions, man could know nothing whatever, except what is 
under his nose.  Consider a journey by such a nescient man along a continuity.  The continuity may 
consist of a uniform colour, texture or sound, or of a repeated pattern ....  Note that at this stage we are concerned with one continuity only, not with a class of continuities.  Some memory is required for this experience.  We need, therefore, a vindication of the informative nature of memory; this is fully elaborated in a later chapter.  ... Let a conclusion be proposed that this continuity will continue for a length constituting at least one-tenth of the length for which it has already proceeded.  In more 
general terms we may suppose a belief in a continuance for at least 1/ x of the length for which it 
has already proceeded.  If we entertain the belief of at least one-tenth, which is the conclusion of our argument, continuously from the beginning to the end of the journey, it is quite certain that we shall be right ten times for every once that we are wrong.  We shall be right during the first ten-elevenths of the journey and wrong during the last eleventh.  If we entertain the belief of continuance for at least 1/ x, it is quite certain we shall be right x times for every once that we are 
wrong.  This, in accordance with the traditional notation, gives a probability of being correct of 
x/x+1.  The probability of the belief in continuance will be higher, the more modest the 
extrapolation. (Harrod 1956, pp. 52-3) 187 
  We can set this out diagrammatically, representing the continuity (which is of 
unknown length) as a rectangle divided into eleven equal segments:72 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11  
 
The man sets out along the continuity from left to right, and as he goes, he repeatedly 
makes predictions that it will continue for at least one tenth of the extent that he has already observed – in the diagram just ten such predictions are shown as arrows, but it is supposed that he makes them constantly and without interruption (let us call any such prediction a “one-tenth-extrapolation”, or simply an “extrapolation” for short).
73  
Obviously the man does not know which of his one-tenth-extrapolations will succeed and which will fail (he remains unaware of what proportion of the continuity he has traversed until he reaches its end), but we can see from the diagram that all of those that he makes during the unshaded segments of his journey (i.e. the first ten-elevenths) will succeed, whereas all of those made during the shaded eleventh segment will fail (the rightmost arrow in the diagram, starting from the boundary between the tenth and 
                                               
 
72 For the sake of simplicity and concreteness, in what follows I shall generally deal only with the 
case of x=10, and silently adapt quotations from Harrod accordingly.  Much of his own discussion seeks 
to be more general (though sometimes inconsistently, for example on p. 57 of his book), but the logic of his argument is completely unaffected by the particular value chosen, except that the relevant proportions and probabilities, notably x/(x+1) and x²/(x+1)², obviously increase for greater values of x. 
73 Again for simplicity I shall silently substitute this terminology of “making extrapolations” into 
quotations from Harrod, since his own terminology of “giving answers” is infelicitous and potentially 
confusing within short extracts. 188 
 eleventh segments, represents the very last one-tenth-extrapolation to succeed).  This 
calculation is quite independent of the length of the continuity,74 and Harrod 
accordingly suggests that it is tempting to conclude, as an a priori  truth, that any one-
tenth-extrapolation has, in the absence of special considerations, a probability of 10/11, or in other words approximately 0·91. 
Although Harrod modestly admits that he had originally been inclined to draw this 
conclusion himself,
75 he goes on to point out a crucial objection: 
We now proceed to the next stage of our argument.  It may be objected that this probability number 
[viz. 0·91 or whatever] would not have relevance to any actual situation where someone was 
striving to enlarge his knowledge ....  The ground of the objection is that ... at any point of the journey ... some of the one-tenth-extrapolations have already been entertained and proved correct.  But the traveller is interested in what lies ahead, and will therefore not deem this probability number to be relevant to his case.  Even those one-tenth-extrapolations already made that have not 
yet been proved correct, viz. the last one-eleventh of them, must be assumed for his purposes to 
have been correct if he is to assign to a further continuance of one-tenth any positive probability at all; for if any of the one-tenth-extrapolations already made are false, the extrapolation that he gives now and all future extrapolations must be false also.”   (Harrod 1956, p. 54) 
                                                
74 As long as that length is finite – obviously in an infinite continuity every  one-tenth-extrapolation 
will eventually turn out to be true.  We shall ignore this complication while discussing Harrod’s 
argument (as he largely does himself), because the only significance he sees in it (1956, p. 64) is to change the relevant probability judgements from equalities (e.g. “Probability = 10/11”) to inequalities 
(e.g. “Probability ≥ 10/11”). 
75 In his Preface (1956, p. xiv), Harrod credits J.O. Urmson with having noticed this difficulty. 189 
 Again it is helpful to illustrate the point diagrammatically: 
     A               B     C     D       E 
            ? ?  
 
Here C represents the point reached by the traveller, and the ten unshaded segments 
(from A to B) the first ten-elevenths of the continuity so far observed  (the traveller 
does not yet know how long the continuity will go on, so he cannot of course tell what proportion the distance travelled AC is of the 
total continuity AE).  All of the one-
tenth-extrapolations made during the journey AB (a few are shown, as solid arrows) have therefore already been verified, and those made during the lightly shaded segment BC – which are “pending” and not yet verified – will also have to turn out true if the currently contemplated extrapolation CD (shown as a dotted arrow) is itself to have any chance of being successful.  So although the traveller indeed knows 
a priori , on the 
basis of the first stage of Harrod’s argument, that ten-elevenths (roughly 91%) of the overall continuity AE will ultimately turn out to have yielded true extrapolations, he also knows that a particular section of that continuity, namely AB, has 
already  yielded 
100% true extrapolations, so that the proportion of true extrapolations made over the remainder BE must inevitably be less than the overall 91%.  How much less he cannot tell, because as was pointed out earlier, he does not yet know the length of the total continuity AE, and so cannot assess what proportion AB/AE of the total set of true extrapolations have already been verified.  Moreover of those extrapolations made during BE, which might in the worst case 
all turn out to be false (if the continuity in 
fact ends immediately at C), the traveller knows that those made within the lightly 190 
 shaded interval BC are, so to speak, “ahead in the queue” of the extrapolation CD 
which he is now contemplating.  All things considered, therefore, Harrod recognises that it is quite impossible, on the basis merely of the first stage of his argument, to justify the claim that the current extrapolation will probably succeed. 
12.2 Harrod’s Revised “Square Array” Argument 
Harrod believes that he has a way of overcoming the difficulty that he himself has raised against his initial simple argument: 
The next step is to consider this series [of one-tenth-extrapolations] from every point of view, 
namely from the point of view of every position on the line.  The total array of extrapolations, 
namely the series of extrapolations considered in turn from every point of view, may be represented 
by a square, each side of which has eleven units.  The horizontal side of the square is simply the series of extrapolations; the vertical side of the square represents the number of times that this series has to be surveyed, if it is surveyed from every point of the journey. 
 ... the whole area on the left-hand side of the diagonal represents, within the total array of 
extrapolations, all the extrapolations that have already been given considered from every point of 
view; the area of the right-hand side represents the extrapolations still to come.  Taking the journey 
as a whole and surveying it successively from every point of view during the course of the journey, it is clear that half the total array of extrapolations belong to the past.  In order to get a probability that will be relevant to a traveller in the course of the journey, it is necessary to subtract extrapolations already given.  Therefore, in estimating this probability we should concern ourselves only with the extrapolations on the right-hand side of the diagonal. 
 191 
              
             
             
             
             
    11 units             
 P       Q          R   S 
    
             
             
             
         1 0  u n i t s        1 unit 
 It is to be noted that in the total array of extrapolations, equal weight is given to each of the 
series as surveyed from each point of view.  This implies that the traveller is equally likely to be at one point as at any other point of his journey.  This is not an application of the Principle of 
Indifference.  It is by definition quite certain that the traveller will be an equal time in each ... equal 
part of the line .... 
 In the figure an area on the right-hand side of the square has been shaded.  This is a rectangle 
equal to one-eleventh part of the whole square.  Within this rectangle all the answers are false; in the remainder of the square all the answers are true.  ... To assess the probability for a traveller, 
who has already proceeded part of the way – he knows not what proportion – we must subtract 
extrapolations already made.  ... That leaves the extrapolations to the right of the diagonal.  The probability of being correct in a one-tenth-extrapolation is represented by the ratio of the unshaded area on the right of the diagonal to the whole area on the right of the diagonal.  ... the ratio of true      192 
 extrapolations to all extrapolations, after subtracting extrapolations already made as surveyed from 
every point of view, is seen to be 10²/11². 
  (Harrod 1956, pp. 55-7) 
The logic of Harrod’s reasoning here can perhaps be clarified if we add to his 
square diagram some additional arrows representing a number of possible series of repeated extrapolations.  Each such series begins at some point within the continuity, and these points are evenly spaced from the continuity’s beginning to its end: 
             
             
             
             
             
    11 units             
 P       Q          R  S 
    
             
             
             
         1 0  u n i t s        1 unit 193 
 Harrod’s idea is that we can allow for the disregarding of past extrapolations by 
considering only the series of those that are future  at each point along the continuity,76 
and by calculating the average proportion of such future extrapolations that will turn out to be true.  For example point Q in the diagram is roughly 4/11 of the way along the continuity, and a traveller who starts from Q will make correct extrapolations from Q 
to R (i.e. roughly 6/11 of the continuity), and false ones from R to S (exactly 1/11).  
Hence his series of future extrapolations, which lasts altogether around 7/11 of the continuity, will contain roughly six true extrapolations for every one that is false.  This ratio of true to false extrapolations within each series will obviously be more favourable the earlier in the continuity the series starts (e.g. the most favourable ratio, of ten true to one false, will be achieved by a traveller who starts his series of extrapolations immediately the continuity has begun, while a traveller whose series starts in the last eleventh of the continuity will make no true extrapolations whatever). 
In the diagram we have represented the possible series of extrapolations from, so 
to speak, a “God’s eye” perspective, but of course Harrod’s “nescient” traveller cannot know which point on the square’s diagonal corresponds to his own current position – though he knows how long the continuity has already lasted in 
absolute  terms, he has 
no idea what its total length will be, and therefore no idea what proportion  of it is past 
                                                
76 Strictly, Harrod usually discusses this more in terms of an ongoing series of extrapolations from 
the beginning of the continuity to the end , in which the traveller however focuses only on the proportions 
of true and false extrapolations within the subseries of those that are future .  Obviously both methods of 
expression come to the same thing, but it is far simpler to discuss the issue in terms of a series that 
begins from the current position. 194 
 and what proportion future.  Hence, also, if he now begins his own series of one-tenth-
extrapolations, he will be unable to work out in advance how large a proportion of this series will turn out to be true and how large a proportion false.  But what he can reasonably do, according to Harrod, is to take an average over all the possible series, giving equal weight to each point on the diagonal.  If he does so, he w ill find that, on 
average, these series contain 100 true extrapolations for every 21 that are false, so 
given his total ignorance of his relative position along the diagonal, Harrod concludes that the nescient traveller is warranted in taking the probability of his own current extrapolation to be 100/121, or around 0·83. 
Before proceeding to discuss the logic of this argument, it is worth noting that if 
successful it would clearly satisfy the criterion developed in §11.2 above.  For each extrapolation that it credits with a probability of 100/121 extends precisely one tenth as far as the continuity already observed – so as the continuity lengthens, the “equiprobable” predictions lengthen too.  Harrod explicitly points out the moral: 
 We must now proceed to the next, and crucial, stage in the argument.  ... Suppose that the 
traveller has already proceeded for ten yards.  ... Therefore the probability of the continuity proceeding for at least a yard is, in these circumstances, 100/121 (= 10²/(10+1)²).  If, on the other 
hand, the continuity has already proceeded for twenty yards, the probab ility of its pro ceeding one 
yard more is equal to the probability of its proceeding for one-twentieth of its length to date; x is in 
this case 20 and the probability of one yard more  is 400/441 (= 109·747/121) .  Thus the probability 
of continuance for at least one yard has substantially risen.  ... Similarly ... we may infer an 
increasing probability of the journey lasting for at least one yard more as the journey proceeds.          195 
 This is true for any other conventional unit of measurement.  It may be called the law of increasing 
probability of continuance.  This is the Principle of Experience . (Harrod 1956, pp. 62-3) 
Harrod claims, then, to have provided an argument which can confer a determinate and 
substantial probability on a prediction, and which can moreover raise the probability of any given prediction arbitrarily close to 1 if the preceding continuity has already persisted for a sufficient extent.
77  We must now investigate whether his “square array” 
argument is indeed powerful enough to deliver such a momentous result. 
12.3 Blackburn’s Discussion of Harrod’s Argument 
Although Harrod’s argument is perhaps the best known of the probabilistic attempts to 
justify induction, it has on the whole been very poorly discussed by critics.  Its initial 
publication in 1951 seems to have gone unremarked (Kneebone 1951 barely mentions it), and despite the rapid appearance of two hostile responses (Bronowski 1957 and Popper 1958) in the 
British Journal of Philosophy of Science  following its restatement 
and development in Harrod’s book (1956), the objections offered by these eminent critics are unclear and insubstantial, and Popper’s in particular was soon answered forcefully by Harrod himself (Harrod 1959).  Kyburg (1964) gives the argument a brief 
                                               
 
77 On these principles, for a prediction of one yard to achieve a probability of p, where p is a value 
arbitrarily close to 1, it must simply be the case that when the prediction is made the previous length of 
the continuity, in yards, has reached at least ( p+√p)/(1– p)  –  slightly less than 2/(1– p). 196 
 mention in his review of “Recent work in Inductive Logic”, but he only describes it in 
its initial unrevised form, and confines his criticism to briefly reiterating a dubious objection of Bronowski’s,
78 and then raising a second difficulty which seems very 
much in the same spirit as the one that Harrod himself had urged against his initial argument, and which had indeed prompted him to develop the revised version. 
Ayer’s paper “Has Harrod Answered Hume”, published in 1970 but more widely 
available after its inclusion in 
Probability and Evidence  (1972), was therefore the first 
substantial published critique of the revised argument, but disappointingly Ayer focuses mainly on relatively peripheral issues such as the place of memory in Harrod’s account and some complications in the notion of a “continuity”.  His only significant criticism of the 
logic  of the argument is very cursory, and moreover somewhat gives 
the impression of ignoring the declared purpose of Harrod’s averaging procedure: 
 Does [Harrod’s] second formula meet the difficulty?  I do not think that it does.  It does not 
discount the past in the way that is required.  What the formula yields is the result of neglecting past successes from the point of view of every position on the line; what it does not yield is the result of neglecting past successes from any given point of view.  But this makes it useless to the traveller.  It is of no interest to him to know that the ratio of future successes to failures in general     
                                                
78 Kyburg summarises Bronowski’s objection thus:  “the argument holds only for nice regular 
Euclidean-like spaces; it wouldn’t hold for a space with more fence per pasture”.  But as Blackburn points out (1973, p. 138) this objection is quite incoherent, because Harrod uses the illustration of a spatial journey only as a metaphor for the temporal (and therefore continuous one-dimensional) experience of a continuity – hence any additional dimensions and properties of space or spaces, whether 
Euclidean or non-Euclidean, are entirely irrelevant to his reasoning. 197 
 is x²/(x+1)².  He wants to know what the proportion of his future successes will be, from the 
position which he actually occupies, and this the formula does not tell him.  Since it treats his 
position as an unknown factor, it is not to be expected that it should. 
 It would appear, then, that the principle of indifference, in the form of the assumption that the 
traveller is as likely on any given occasion to be at any one point in the line as at any other, is required after all. (Ayer 1970, p. 107) 
It is surprising that Ayer’s critique is so unfocused, and that its fundamental objection 
culminates with the supposedly devastating accusation that Harrod must depend on the Principle of Indifference.  For in 1969 Ayer had examined a PhD thesis by Simon Blackburn that was later to appear as a book (1973), in which Blackburn discusses Harrod’s argument in depth, restates it in a manner that 
explicitly  relies on a 
“defensible” version of the Principle of Indifference, and then, despite his evident sympathy for Harrod’s project, provides the only clear statement so far of a genuinely powerful objection to the logic of the revised argument.  We must now examine this objection, and having done so, will then turn to consider Blackburn’s own suggested twist on the argument, by which he believes that it can be resuscitated to serve as the basis for a successful defence of induction against the sceptic. 
Blackburn’s objection to Harrod’s revised argument “is the precise counterpart of 
the point which rendered revision of the argument necessary in the first place”.  And this objection is, that when we are about to make a one-tenth-extrapolation, we cannot assess its probability purely on the basis of the 100/121 proportion of successful extrapolations in the total aggregate of Harrod’s series.  For “we do know something further about our prediction: it is not in the chunk of the total aggregate which consists 198 
 of all the regular predictions made by any successive starter from the beginning until 
[ten-elevenths of the continuity so far observed] had passed” (1973, pp. 146-7).  This way of expressing the objection appropriately stresses its similarity with the difficulty that Harrod had recognised in his initial argument.  But to emphasise that it does indeed hit home just as effectively in the case of the revised argument, it may be worth 
spelling out the point in a way that more directly reflects Harrod’s method of 
presenting that second argument, focusing on the “vertical” progression “up the square array” through the series of extrapolations, rather than on the “horizontal” progress “from left to right” through the continuity itself.
79 
In these terms, then, the thrust of Blackburn’s criticism is that when the traveller 
begins to make his series of one-tenth-extrapolations, he is not entitled to assume a 100/121 probability of successful prediction, because the 100/121 proportion is a uniform average over all the possible series (from the very first series which began at the start of the continuity, to the very last series which will begin just as the continuity ends), whereas the traveller’s knowledge is not uniform in this respect: 
he already 
knows that some of the continuity has passed,  and hence that the series he is about to 
initiate is not one of the very earliest .  Hence the overall average must be modified to 
exclude these early series, and since they are the series for which the proportion of successful extrapolations is highest, this modification implies that the overall 
                                               
 
79 Since the objection amounts to ruling out of consideration those parts of Harrod’s square array 
that lie to the left of or below the traveller’s current position on the diagonal, it can quite legitimately be 
expressed in either “horizontal” or “vertical” terms – both come to exactly the same thing. 199 
 probability of success (calculated as the average of the remainder) should be reduced 
from 100/121 to some lower figure.  How much  lower the traveller could only tell if he 
knew what proportion of the continuity he has already traversed.  And because he does not know this, he is quite unable to attach a determinate probability to the one-tenth-extrapolation which he is currently contemplating. 
Since this objection is indeed seriously damaging to Harrod’s position, it is 
particularly interesting to note that he himself appears to anticipate it: 
 Before proceeding it is necessary to give warning against a very strong temptation that must 
be resisted.  It is a fact that, as the traveller proceeds with his journey, the ratio of all true future extrapolations that he will make (by predicting at least 1/10) to all future extrapolations declines.  There is a strong temptation to seek some formula which would take this fact into account, and, in order to get greater refinement, make the probability fall as he progresses.  Any such procedure would lead to a gross fallacy.  In dealing with probability it is essential to abide by the principle 
that a probability is a relation between premises and a conclusion.  But as the traveller pro ceeds 
with his journey he gets no new information of any kind that is relevant to the estimate of this probability, and it would, therefore, be fallacious for him to alter his estimate.  The traveller is assumed to be in complete ignorance in regard to the total length of the continuity.  Consequently he is in complete ignorance as to what relation the length he has already travelled bears to this total length.  Therefore, he cannot bring the length of travel already accomplished into any relation to 
the formula.  ... What we have to do ... is to decide on our formula at the outset, and then to adhere 
to it; we have to adhere to it because in the course of the journey we get no new relevant information.   (Harrod 1956, pp. 60-61) 
But Harrod’s response is not convincing.  If we “cannot bring the length of travel 
already accomplished into any relation to the formula” and hence we cannot revise the 200 
 formula to take that length properly into account, then the natural conclusion to draw is 
not that the formula should be retained unchanged, but rather that it should be discarded on the grounds that it will now give an incorrect result.  Nevertheless there is a more plausible way in which Harrod’s point here can be further developed – this will soon become apparent if we return to our consideration of Blackburn’s discussion. 
Despite his effective criticism of Harrod’s revised argument, Blackburn clearly 
does not regard this as robbing it of all value.  For although it cannot yield what Harrod desires, namely a determinate judgement of probability for a certain class of predictions, nevertheless Blackburn sees it as providing a crucial demonstration that such predictions are at least guaranteed to have a strong connection with general success.  And this connection, he believes, can be sufficient to confound the “Humean sceptic” by showing that the sceptic’s own policy, of consistently refusing to acknowledge the likely success of such predictions, is itself bound to fail: 
 The whole line of thought starts with the fact that over a period of time – when that time 
includes the start of some continuities – it must happen relatively rarely that we are in the last fraction of the duration of those continuities.  The sceptic is not impressed with this; he puts weight on the existence of the duration of the continuity up till now as destroying any guarantee that a predictive policy started now will have a high su ccess rate.  We then point out, in revising the 
argument, that even taking this into account, still on the average the policy of predicting at least a 
one-tenth continuance time has a high success rate.  The sceptic replies that this is true if we take 
the average of people starting to use that policy from beginning to end of the regularity; still, we are not at the beginning of the regularity, we are, in my example, ten years through its life, so averages of success rates from beginning to end of the continuity do not interest him. 201 
  But we in turn can wonder how little interest a sceptic could be entitled to betray in such an 
average.  Let us consider a Humean sceptic, one who thinks that ... a degree of confidence of 1/4 ... 
is as justified as 10²/11².  ... We try to attack this claim by pointing out that 1/4 is the degree of confidence appropriate to use of a policy that goes wrong three times out of four; but, we say, it is a very rare event indeed for someone to start predicting a one-tenth continuance somewhere along a regularity, and be wrong three times out of four.  The inevitable reply is that this is a rare event 
only in the class of possible users of that policy from beginning to end of the regularity, and we are 
not at the beginning, we are ten years through it.  Yes, but what connection with success enables a pessimist to use that fact to justify, at least as far as any other prediction, the expectation that the 
regularity will finish? 
 ... The idea is that the Humean sceptic’s defence of confidence of 1/4 is an instance of a use of 
an argument which itself gives the wrong answer most of the time. 
  (Blackburn 1973, pp. 147-8) 
This is certainly a neat piece of ju-jitsu , and it may perhaps also provide a useful model 
for developing the line of thought expressed in the previous quotation from Harrod.  There he pointed out that any particular duration of observed continuity (say, ten years) is a completely unknown proportion of the total continuity, and hence no specific weight can be given to it as a factor implying a reduction in the overall probability of a successful extrapolation.  So on this basis Harrod might join Blackburn in responding to the latter’s Humean sceptic:  “I acknowledge that we are ten years through the continuity, but what enables you to use 
that fact to justify, at least as far as any other 
prediction, the expectation that the regularity will finish?  If ten years of continuity is sufficient to undermine my expectation that this sort of extrapolation will generally be reliable, then why should not the same be true of ten days, ten hours, ten seconds, ten microseconds?  And if 
any duration of continuity at all is, according to you, sufficient 202 
 to undermine that expectation, then how can you reconcile this with the general high 
ratio of success apparently guaranteed by my revised argument?” 
It seems, then, that the spirit of Harrod’s argument is still alive and kicking, even if 
Blackburn’s criticism has undermined its pretention to deliver precise probabilities for the relevant extrapolations.  To assess whether it deserves this continued vitality, and 
whether it can bear even the reduced weight that Blackburn’s anti-sceptical twist places 
on it, we must turn to consider some new, and more fundamental, objections. 
12.4 Two Decisive Objections to Harrod’s Argument 
I shall now attempt to prove that, when analysed more deeply, Harrod’s argument is much weaker than the previous discussion would suggest, and in fact ultimately provides not even the flimsiest basis on which to construct a probabilistic defence of induction.  I shall start with two criticisms that focus on respects in which Harrod’s presentation of his argument is subtly but seriously misleading, and has in fact seduced commentators into failing to notice the real underlying logic of the situation. 
First, and most fundamentally, Harrod’s square array completely misrepresents 
what is of interest to the traveller who is about to make a one-tenth-extrapolation.  Harrod sees him as initiating a series of future extrapolations, and wishing to know 
what proportion of the extrapolations in that series will turn out to be true .  Since the 
traveller does not know what fraction of the continuity he has already traversed, he         203 
 cannot of course calculate this proportion of true future extrapolations directly, but he 
can supposedly allow for this ignorance by averaging over all possible series  – those 
beginning from every position on the continuity – thus yielding Harrod’s 10²/11² result.  We can see from the quotation given earlier that Ayer (1970, p. 107) goes along with this perception of what the traveller wishes to know: “He wants to know what the 
proportion of his future successes will be, from the position which he actually 
occupies”.  And Blackburn’s sympathetic treatment of the argument indicates that he too concurs in viewing it in this way. 
However this is a complete illusion engendered by Harrod’s clever presentation, 
and by his “square array” diagram in particular.  For what the traveller wishes to know, regarding the series of future extrapolations that he is about to initiate, is not 
what 
proportion of the extrapolations in that series will turn out to be true , but simply 
whether any at all  of the extrapolations in that series will turn out to be true .  Just one 
solitary success will be quite enough to satisfy him in his role as a one-tenth-extrapolator, because the series of extrapolations is not random but 
sequentially 
ordered .  The future extrapolations in that series form an orderly queue, and the 
particular one-tenth-extrapolation which the traveller is just about to make is firmly at the head of that queue – if 
any other extrapolation in the series ultimately turns out to 
be true, then this one certainly will too.  Thus Harrod’s square array diagram is entirely misleading – the only question that matters concerning any point on the diagonal is whether it is, or is not, within the shaded rightmost eleventh of the square, and beyond that, its particular distance from the right-hand side is utterly irrelevant.  As far as the 204 
 logic of the situation is concerned, therefore, Harrod would be just as well to stick with 
his initial unrevised one-dimensional argument. 
Going back to that initial argument, then, we must recall the important objection 
which Harrod himself saw as decisive (discussed above in §12.1), but in doing so we can now take particular notice of a second important respect in which his presentation, 
even of that initial argument, lends it more credibility than it deserves.  Here again are 
the two diagrams which I used to illustrate that discussion: 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11  
 
     A               B     C     D       E 
            ? ?  
 
There is a fundamental difference of perspective between these two.  The first, like 
Harrod’s own square array diagram and like most of his analysis, presents the situation from a “God’s eye” point of view; whereas the second represents things as they appear to the traveller: with knowledge of what lies behind him, but total uncertainty ahead.  As far as the traveller is concerned, 
unless he can appeal to induction  the past history 
of the continuity from A to C is entirely irrelevant to his situation.  Seen in this light it is obvious that he gains nothing by examining the overall proportion of true extrapolations over the entire series from A to E, when he is well aware that the past extrapolations shown as solid arrows have already been confirmed.  To proceed in such 205 
 a manner would be like trying to improve his chance of winning a lottery by placing his 
ticket in a folder together with a number of winning tickets from previous weeks, on the grounds that the new ticket has thus become one of a series most of which have been successful!  Viewed as a justification of induction, Harrod’s argument seems ultimately no more powerful than this. 
12.5 A Further Objection to Blackburn 
It seems doubtful whether Blackburn’s attempted rehabilitation of Harrod’s argument can survive the criticisms that we have just discussed.  At the very least the first of them shows that there is no advantage in moving from the initial one-dimensional argument to the two-dimensional array; while the second indicates that there is something very questionable about the traveller’s drawing inferences regarding the probable success of his current extrapolation on the basis of a proportion which can only be guaranteed by including already-verified extrapolations within the relevant set, and by ignoring the fact that the members of that set are sequentially ordered.  Nevertheless it might be thought that Blackburn’s anti-sceptical twist on Harrod’s strategy blunts the force of this latter point – perhaps the current extrapolation can indeed derive a presumption of success not on the basis of a would-be proportional syllogism that illegitimately conflates together past and future extrapolations within the present continuity, but instead by appeal to the general success of a one-tenth-extrapolation policy as it would apply more widely.  In other words, perhaps Blackburn can defend Harrod’s initial argument not by considering the current extrapolation as 206 
 one member of the set of one-tenth-extrapolations within the present continuity , but 
instead by considering it as one member of the far larger set of all one-tenth-
extrapolations within any continuity whatever . 
The objection to this procedure, however, is that the 10/11 proportion of successful 
extrapolations (or 10²/11² according to the revised argument) is guaranteed for each 
continuity quite independently of every other continuity – 10/11 is not just an overall 
average for the set of extrapolations taken as a whole, but is an individual average for every distinct series of extrapolations within that overall set.
80  Hence an appeal to the 
10/11 success rate of a one-tenth-extrapolation policy as it would apply within other continuities can be of no relevance whatever to the traveller making such an extrapolation on a particular occasion – everything that he knows is summed up in the final diagram of the previous section (§12.4), and as we have seen, his knowledge of the eventual 10/11 success rate for the entire series of extrapolations within his 
present  
continuity, which is the only relevant information that either Harrod’s or Blackburn’s argument yields, is of absolutely no help to him. 
                                               
 
80 Perhaps this observation provides a grain of truth motivating Popper’s otherwise very puzzling 
objection to Harrod’s argument, which seems to be that because the proportion of successful extrapolations is fixed even if the traveller knows when the uniformity will end, this proportion “ cannot 
be a probability that may be interpreted as the degree of [the traveller’s] imperfect knowledge ” (Popper 
1958, p. 223).  As both Harrod (1959) and Blackburn (1973, pp. 139-40) point out, this argument as it 
stands just seems to be a non-sequitur . 207 
 12.6 Scale Invariance and Infinities 
Despite its logical flaws there may yet remain some attraction in the Harrod-Blackburn 
argument, because it does seem very appealing to base our inductive predictions on considerations that apparently apply 
a priori  to any continuity quite independently of 
its scale.  If we imagine ourselves mysteriously transported into an alien universe whose ways of working are completely unknown to us, we surely could not predict in advance what would be the typical extent of the continuities that we observe there, but it does seem plausible that having observed any particular continuity for a given time, we would thereby acquire some understanding of its overall scale and could thereafter predict with reasonable confidence that it would be likely to continue for at least a small fraction of its current extent.  Such “scale-invariant” reasoning can also be appropriate in common life.  Suppose that I send a letter to some organisation initially anticipating an immediate reply, but although I am assured that my letter has been received and will ultimately be acted on, no reply is forthcoming.  For the first day or two I may be surprised when nothing arrives.  After one week, I will adjust my expectation but may nevertheless retain a reasonable confidence that although no reply can be expected within the next day, at any rate one will probably appear within another week.  After one month, I will revise my estimate again, and probably start measuring the expected further delay in terms of months rather than weeks, and so on. 
We shall see in the following chapter that scale-invariance may indeed provide the 
best hope for a probabilistic justification of induction, though it raises a host of difficulties at very large and very small scales.  Before leaving Harrod and Blackburn,    208 
 however, it is worth noting that their argument, despite appearances, is not in fact 
thoroughly scale-invariant, because it treats the density of extrapolations made during the traveller’s journey as being entirely uniform.  The consequences of this are, first, that awkward questions can be raised regarding the alleged 
a prioricity  of their model; 
and secondly, that even if their strategy were appropriate in principle, there is no reason 
for supposing that it would deliver the correct result. 
The first of these points can be put like this.  Harrod’s traveller is supposed to have 
an a priori  guarantee that ten-elevenths of his total series of extrapolations, from the 
beginning of the continuity to its end, will ultimately turn out to be verified.  But of course such a claim can be strictly true only if the number of extrapolations within that series is an exact multiple of eleven.  This is an irritating complication, but since the traveller is an inhabitant of a thought-experiment rather than a real human being, Harrod can apparently get round it simply by postulating that the extrapolations are made at a sufficiently high rate for any rounding error to be negligible, say one extrapolation per microsecond.  All very well, but one per microsecond is not enough to ensure the literal 
a prioricity  of even an approximate 10/11 ratio – suppose, for 
example, that we consider a world in which every uniformity lasts between 1·0 and 1·09 microseconds: time enough for one extrapolation to be made but insufficient for any at all to be verified.  To ensure that his thought experiment is literally 
a priori , 
therefore, it seems that Harrod must postulate that the extrapolations are made continuously, thus implying that an infinite number of them occur within any finite interval.  Given the obvious objection to any thought experiment which presupposes the achievement of an infinite task within a finite time, however, he would presumably 209 
 be wise to portray the tale of his traveller as merely an expository metaphor, with the 
real logical force of his argument being conveyed by a mathematical model in which every point on the continuity is considered as the origin of an abstract and hypothetical one-tenth-extrapolation. 
Once infinities enter the picture, however, the 10/11 ratio begins to be undermined 
in a quite different way.  For now it is possible to generate other ratios by changing the 
mathematical model accordingly.  And it is interesting to note that this can be done in a way that is more faithful than is Harrod’s own argument to the scale-invariant intuitions that appear to underlie it.  Suppose, for example, that we imagine an infinite  series of nine-fold-extrapolations, each new such extrapolation being made just as the last is fulfilled.  If the relevant continuity lasts as long as 1 second, then one of these extrapolations will predict the continuity’s persistence for a further 9 seconds.  If that extrapolation is fulfilled (after a total of 10 seconds), then another will immediately be made, this time predicting a further 90 seconds (to 100 seconds in all); and so on until the continuity terminates.  This, however, is to look only at the very end of the series.  By the time we reach 1 second we have already verified extrapolations made (in reverse order) at 0·1 seconds, 0·01 seconds, 0·001 seconds, and so on.  So if an infinite density of extrapolations is to be permitted, then we can set up an infinite series of such extrapolations in which only one – the last – will be false and all the others true.  If Blackburn’s Principle of Indifference is applicable to this series (and it is not clear why it should not be if it is applicable to an infinite series of uniform density), then we can apparently draw the conclusion that any such nine-fold extrapolation is virtually certain to be fulfilled.  And this, one might think, is rather too good to be true!  Of course 210 
 many other setups will also be possible, with varying density of extrapolations and 
correspondingly different proportions of true extrapolations within any series.  In short, if we permit the mathematical tricks that Harrod and Blackburn need in order to make their form of argument genuinely 
a priori , then any number of alternative models 
become possible, delivering a wide variety of very different answers. 
12.7 Conclusion 
Our conclusion must be that Harrod’s argument fails to justify induction, and moreover does so (because of its singular nature) in a way that makes it difficult for any of its logical machinery to be salvaged from the wreck.  Only the hint of scale invariance as a clue to further progress seems worth preserving, though any development along these lines will clearly have to contend with potentially unruly infinities. 
Blackburn’s interesting twist on the argument is also suggestive, and his essential 
idea might well survive the demise of its original context.  At any rate we have hitherto seen no reason why his method of turning the tables on the sceptic should not play a role in some future pro-inductive strategy, if only it can be harnessed to logical machinery that genuinely works. 211 
 Chapter 13   Continuing Uniformity 
(c)  An Objective Prior? 
13.1 Introduction:  The Need for an 
“Objective Prior” 
In Chapter 11 we examined Mackie’s attempt to justify induction on the basis that 
general uniformity, having been evident in our experience for a very long time, is extremely likely to continue for a least a limited further period.  Our examination concluded that his attempt failed, but that this failure need not be due to any incorrectness in the inverse probability argument he employed, but simply to the fact that such arguments must inevitably presuppose some prior probability distribution 
U(x) for the expected extent of uniformity.  Put crudely, if the prior probability 
distribution is “inductively favourable” then an argument such as Mackie’s can satisfy our criterion for justificatory success (§ 11.2), but otherwise it cannot.  So this kind of argument seems to take us no closer to a probabilistic justification of induction – it simply demonstrates where the heart of the problem lies: that of establishing an “inductively favourable” prior probability distribution for the extent of uniformity. 
It is important to re-emphasise that the prior probability distribution we seek, if it 
is to play its intended role, must be both literally 
a priori  and thoroughly “objective” 212 
 (a word that I shall henceforth release from the scare quotes imposed in §8.1, since no 
confusion with Frequentism is here at all likely).  We saw in Sections 3.2 and 8.2 that Hume’s argument can only be circumvented by a probabilistic justification 
that makes 
no appeal whatever to experience , and Section 11.1 made clear that the Personalist’s 
method of building a justification by iteration on a non-specific “subjective” prior is in 
this context not an option.  To provide any opposition to Hume, therefore, we must find 
some way of deriving an objective prior probability distribution U(x) for the extent of 
uniformity, founded on total ignorance of matter of fact. 
13.2 Finite and Infinite Applications of the 
Principle of Indifference 
Attempts to establish objective “ignorance” priors have almost invariably been based 
on some form of the Principle of Indifference, or on analogous considerations of logical symmetry.  But the time has come to distinguish two quite different types of application of this principle, depending on whether it is used on the one hand to apportion the “probability measure” between 
a finite number of discrete possibilities , 
or on the other, to assign a measure function over an infinite range of possibilities  such 
as an interval of the real numbers or some geometrical space. 
Even the discrete applications of the Principle of Indifference are controversial, as 
we saw in §9.5.  But we there decided, in line with the policy announced in §7.1 and §8.3, to allow Hume’s opponent the benefit of the doubt in this respect, given that 213 
 Keynes and others have demonstrated reasonably plausible ways in which the principle 
can be qualified so as to be confined to cases of genuine symmetry, and in circumstances where paradox can apparently be avoided. 
We have also allowed to go unchallenged, within Mackie’s argument (§§11.3-4), 
two applications of the Principle of Indifference to a continuous range:  one infinite in 
extent (remarked on in the footnote to §11.4) and the other a finite time interval 
(yielding the proportion (
x – p)/x, and in fact guaranteed to be harmless if the infinite 
case is legitimate).  Again these seemed plausible applications, despite the fact that the infinite uniform prior is “improper” – having no finite integral – and therefore cannot represent a conventional probability distribution summing to 1.  For Mackie’s argument was intended to be in a sense “timeless” – the whole point of the prior probabilities was to avoid giving any privilege to one point in the universal time sequence above any other, and it was only the empirical evidence of observed uniformity, serving as an anchor for the hypothesised durations of uniformity, that broke the infinite symmetry.  Once the symmetry was broken, and the limits of empirical possibility established, the improper prior could straightforwardly reduce to a uniform prior over a finite range, which could therefore be rendered “proper” by the simple expedient of rescaling. 
If this sort of manoeuvre is indeed legitimate, then the question naturally arises: 
why we should not take the uniform improper prior over the infinite half-line, from 0 to infinity, as an appropriate function 
U(x) for the a priori  expected extent of uniformity?  
And if we are permitted to do so, then it does appear that induction can be justified by Mackie’s method, because the uniform prior over the infinite half-line is, so to speak, 214 
 infinitely weighted towards the upper end.  To understand why we cannot 
complacently follow this line, it is necessary to examine the well-known paradoxes of “geometrical probability”, which historically have been largely responsible for the opprobrium with which the Principle of Indifference is commonly viewed. 
13.3 The Paradoxes of Geometrical Probability 
These paradoxes can arise when the Principle of Indifference is applied to continuously varying quantities such as physical length, area, volume, weight, density, temperature or temporal duration.  All that is required to generate paradox is that two or more such quantities be related non-linearly and known to vary within corresponding limits (for example, a cubic die known to have an edge between 1
 cm and 3  cm, with a side area 
correspondingly between 1  cm² and 9  cm², and a volume between 1  cm³ and 27  cm³).  
Then precisely because the relation between them is non-linear, the Principle of Indifference as applied to the different quantities will inevitably yield contradictory results.  Two extended examples will suffice to give the flavour of such paradoxes:  the first is an adaptation of one given by Von Mises (1957, p. 77), and the second is the famous paradox of Bertrand (Bertrand 1889, p. 5). 
Von Mises asks us to imagine that we are faced with a flask containing a mixture 
of water and wine.  Now suppose we are told that the relative proportions of water and wine are somewhere between 1:3 and 3:1, but we are given no further information.  The problem is then to use the Principle of Indifference to work out from what we have 215 
 been told a prior probability distribution, which will provide an objective method of 
assessing the probability that the mixture contains more water than wine .  We can 
proceed in at least three different ways: 
(a) On the face of it the answer is simple: our information gives no ground for 
distinguishing between water and wine, so the probability that there is more water 
than wine should presumably be the same as the probability that there is more 
wine than water.  Assuming that the continuous nature of the distribution permits us to discount the possibility of there being exactly equal amounts of each, this reasoning yields a probability of 
1/2 that there is more water than wine.  (Another 
way of reaching this conclusion is to apply the Principle of Indifference to the absolute quantity of water or wine: each constitutes between 
1/4 and 3/4 of the 
liquid in the flask, a range centred on 1/2 – the very amount that implies equal 
quantities of each.) 
(b) Our information tells us that the ratio of water to wine lies between 1/3 and 3 – and 
that is all.  If we accordingly apply the Principle of Indifference to the interval between 
1/3 and 3 we will find that 3/4 of that interval (between 1 and 3) 
corresponds to the situation of there being more water than wine, whereas only 1/4 
of it (between 1/3 and 1) corresponds to the situation of there being more wine than 
water.  Again discounting the possibility of exactly equal amounts, we are left with a probability of 
3/4 that the mixture contains more water than wine. 
(c) Turning our attention now to the ratio of wine to water, this also lies between 1/3 
and 3 – so a parallel argument to that in (b) can be applied in the same way to this 216 
 ratio.  This yields a probability of 3/4 that the mixture contains more wine than 
water, and hence a probability of only 1/4 that it contains more water than wine. 
So we are left with a paradox.  Three different methods of argument using the Principle 
of Indifference, each based on exactly the same information, give three very different answers to exactly the same problem.  And although in this particular case the overall 
symmetry in the situation, between water and wine, may incline us to see one of these 
answers (namely the first, giving an equal probability of each predominating), it is obvious that any number of variations can easily be constructed which would eliminate the symmetry whilst retaining the paradox (e.g. in Von Mises’ asymmetrical original we are given only that the water to wine ratio lies between 1 and 2, so that the wine to water ratio correspondingly lies between 
1/2 and 1 – here the Principle of Indifference 
yields just two contradictory probability distributions, corresponding to our methods (b) and (c) above). 
Turning now to Bertrand’s paradox, we are asked to imagine a chord of a circle 
being drawn at random (Jaynes 1973, p. 134, suggests we think of long straws being tossed randomly into the vicinity of the circle, and confine our attention to those straws that intersect it).  Any such chord must have some length between 0 (in the limiting case of a tangent to the circle) and 2
r, twice the circle’s radius (in the other limiting 
case, of a diameter).  The problem Bertrand poses is to work out, based on this information alone, the probability that any chord thus produced will have a length greater than the side of an equilateral triangle inscribed within the circle.  And just as in   217 
 the case of our water and wine paradox, there are at least three different methods of 
calculating the relevant probability using the Principle of Indifference. 
 
  
 
             T h i s  l i n e  f o r m s  a  c h o r d  l o n g e r  t h a n  t h e            side of the inscribed equilateral triangle  This line forms a chord shorter than the side of the inscribed equilateral triangle  
 
(a) The first method is based on the perpendicular distance between the chord and the 
centre of the circle: 
 
           r/2 
          
                  r 218 
  Clearly this distance can range between 0 (in the case of a diameter) and r, the 
circle’s radius (in the case of a tangent).  And as the diagram indicates, the chord will be longer than the side of the inscribed triangle if, and only if, its perpendicular distance from the centre lies between 
r/2 and r (i.e. within the top 
half of the total range).  On this basis, therefore, the Principle of Indifference gives 
a result of  1/2 for the required probability. 
(b) The second method focuses on the acute angle between the chord in question and 
the tangent to the circle at the point of intersection P.  As the following diagram illustrates, this angle can range from 0º (in the case of a tangent) to 90º (in the case of a diameter), and the chord will be longer than the side of the inscribed triangle if, and only if, it lies in the top third of this range, between 60º and 90º. 
           Q  
 
               R    
           6 0 º  
             P  
 Applying the Principle of Indifference over the range from 0º to 90º, therefore, we 
obtain an answer of 
1/3 for the required probability.  (Another way of getting this 219 
 same answer is to consider the point at the other end of the chord from P as being 
randomly selected from the entire circumference – the relevant arc length PQ is directly proportional to the angle, so the two methods are equivalent.  And it is obvious from the diagram that one third of the circumference, here between Q and R, corresponds to a chord length that exceeds the side of the inscribed triangle.) 
(c) The third method is founded on the observation that any chord (except for the 
limiting case of an exact diameter, which we ignore as vanishingly improbable) can be uniquely specified in terms of its mid-point, which can lie anywhere within the circle.  Any chord which is longer than the side of the inscribed equilateral triangle, however, will have a mid-point that lies within 
r/2 of the centre (as we 
saw in (a) above), and hence within the shaded circle in the following diagram: 
 
 
           r/2  
               r 
 
 The shaded circle has half the radius, and therefore one quarter the area, of the 
larger circle.  Hence the Principle of Indifference, applied to the distribution over this area of the mid-point of a randomly drawn chord, yields a probability of 
1/4 
that such a chord will be longer than the side of an inscribed equilateral triangle. 220 
 Once again we have a paradox, and of a similar kind to the water and wine.  Three 
different methods of argument using the Principle of Indifference, each based on exactly the same information, have given us three very different answers to an identical problem.  The conclusion almost universally drawn from such paradoxes is that the Principle of Indifference, even if it can be defended under certain conditions in its 
application to finite spaces of discrete possibilities, is ineradicably anomalous in any 
application to continuously varying quantities (and indeed to infinite ranges generally).  A n d  i f  t h i s  c o n c l u s i o n  s t a n d s ,  w e  s e e m  t o  b e  l e f t  w i t h  n o  p l a u s i b l e  m e t h o d  o f  establishing an objective ignorance prior for the expected extent of temporal uniformity 
U(x), and hence no possibility of justifying induction on that basis. 
13.4  Indifference Amongst Problems: 
Jaynes’ Answer to Bertrand’s Paradox 
Jaynes (1973), however, argues that things are not nearly so bad, at least with regard to 
the Bertrand Problem.  For he believes that contradiction can be avoided by attending more carefully to the implicit symmetries of the problem as posed: 
 Bertrand’s problem has an obvious element of rotational symmetry, recognised in all the 
proposed solutions; however, this symmetry is irrelevant to the distribution of chord lengths.  There are two other “symmetries” which are highly relevant:  Neither Bertrand’s original statement nor our restatement in terms of straws [being thrown onto the circle] specifies the exact size of the 
circle, or its exact location.  If, therefore, the problem is to have any definite solution at all, it must 
be “indifferent” to these circumstances;  i.e., it must be unchanged by a small change in the size or 221 
 position of the circle.  This seemingly trivial statement, as we shall see, fully determines the 
solution. 
  (Jaynes 1973, p. 136) 
Jaynes then goes on to show by detailed mathematics (too lengthy to repeat here, but 
similar in principle to what we shall be using in the following section) how the joint requirements of: 
• rotational invariance  (the distribution must be similar no matter how the circle – or 
the direction of the straw-thrower – is rotated); 
• scale invariance  (the distribution must be similar if the circle is shrunk or slightly 
expanded, or if its dimensions are measured in different units);  and 
• translational invariance  (the distribution must be similar if the circle – or the 
straw-thrower – is slightly translated in any direction) 
indeed determine a unique distribution for the random position of the straw or the 
drawing of the chord.  In fact they determine the (locally) uniform and isotropic distribution, which implies answer (a) to Bertrand’s problem.  So the problem does after all have a unique solution, namely, that the probability of the randomly drawn chord exceeding in length the side of an inscribed equilateral triangle is one half. 
The significant moral that Jaynes draws from all this is intended to be more widely 
applicable: 222 
 ... the principle of indifference has been unjustly maligned in the past; what it needed was not 
blanket condemnation, but recognition of the proper way to apply it.  We agree with most other 
writers on probability theory that it is dangerous to apply this principle at the level of indifference between events , because our intuition is a very unreliable guide in such matters, as Bertrand’s 
paradox illustrates. 
 However, the principle of indifference may, in our view, be applied legitimately at the more 
abstract level of indifference between problems ;  because that is a matter that is definitely 
determined by the statement of a problem, independently of our intuition.  Every circumstance left unspecified in the statement of a problem defines an invariance property which the solution must have if there is to be any definite solution at all.  The transformation group, which expresses these invariances mathematically, imposes definite restrictions on the form of the solution, and in many cases fully determines it. 
  (Jaynes 1973, p. 144) 
Irrespective of the merits of Jaynes’ solution to the Bertrand case in particular,81 this is 
an extremely interesting idea.  It conjures up the prospect of rescuing the reviled Principle of Indifference in its application to at least some infinite domains, and doing so, moreover, in a principled way that is not motivated merely by ignorance or simplistic assumptions of uniformity.  The Jaynesian manoeuvre even promises to reverse the traditional sceptic’s taunt, that “absence of knowledge isn’t knowledge of absence”, for in the cases where Jaynes proposes to apply it he can plausibly claim that absence of knowledge 
is indeed  knowledge of absence:  what is part of a defined 
                                                
81 Jaynes’ solution is discussed sympathetically by Rosenkrantz (1977) pp. 73-81, relatively 
neutrally by Székely (1986) pp. 43-8 and Van Fraasen (1989) pp. 306-317, and very sceptically by 
Nathan (1984). 223 
 problem, and what is not, can in principle be perfectly determinate even if the problem 
concerns partial knowledge.  Particularly intriguing for our purposes, however, is that this approach has a direct application to the problem of defining our elusive temporal uniformity function 
U(x). 
13.5 Deriving an “Objective” Prior for the 
Extent of Temporal Uniformity 
Our problem is to establish a unique prior probability density function U(x) for the 
extent of temporal uniformity, and to do so in the absence of any empirical knowledge whatever (so there is absolutely no indeterminacy about the 
problem ).  Following 
Jaynes, therefore, let us examine whether there are any fundamental symmetries in this problem that may enable us to transform it into another that is equivalent. 
It might seem at first sight that 
translational invariance  is a possibility, of the 
same kind that Mackie assumes in his own argument.  However this was not translational invariance of the 
extent  of temporal uniformity, merely of its location .  
Nevertheless Mackie’s idea can indeed be put in Jaynesian terms, and it is instructive to illustrate the method by doing so.  Suppose, then, that I am trying to work out, 
a priori , a probability distribution function  S(x) for when uniformity can be expected to 
start.  I now imagine an alter ego  doing this 1000 years ago, and ask:  Would he reach 
the same answer?   Well yes, presumably he would, at least if there is any objective 
answer there to be reached.  For if my distribution function is to be genuinely a priori , 224 
 then the particular point in history at which I contemplate the problem should have no 
impact whatever on the distribution, and hence my historical alter ego ’s function S′(x) 
should be exactly the same as my S(x).  However now consider the a priori  probability 
that uniformity starts right now .82  Again, and for similar reasons, if the distribution is 
to have the objectivity we desire it must be the case that I and my alter ego  reach the 
same answer.  But if we each measure time in years from our instant of contemplation, 
then my right now  – the origin of my distribution – is his 1000.  Hence S(0) = S′(1000 ), 
and by applying similar reasoning to instants t years before and after my present 
moment, we can conclude in general that S(t) = S′(t + 1000 ).  Putting this together with 
our earlier result that my distribution function and that of my alter ego  are identical, i.e. 
S(x) = S′(x), it clearly follows that both distributions are entirely uniform, justifying 
Mackie’s informal intuition (that “It seems a legitimate application of the principle of 
indifference” to assign a uniform prior)83 in an apparently rigorous manner. 
Thus translational invariance seems warranted for the temporal location  function 
S(x), but the same does not apply to our temporal extent  function U(x), and this will 
highlight the considerable gulf between the traditional Principle of Indifference and Jaynes’ version.  On his principle we cannot simplistically argue here in the traditional 
                                               
 
82 Or strictly (since S(x) is a continuous function), that it starts in the interval from now onwards 
for a small period δ x which can then be made to tend to zero in the usual way.  To eliminate another 
possible quibble, note that this is all supposed to be entirely a priori , so of course the mere empirical 
detail that uniformity actually began fifteen billion years ago (or whatever) is irrelevant here. 
83 Mackie (1979) p. 125, as quoted above in §11.3. 225 
 fashion that a priori  we have no knowledge of the extent of uniformity, and that 
therefore we might as well ascribe an equal value to U(1000 ) as to U(2000), U(3000), 
and so on.  For this would not be sanctioned by considerations of translation invariance, given that 
U(x) = U(x+1000) cannot in general be warranted by 
transformations of the problem.  Indeed that equation can be refuted, because the 
function U(x) is undefined or zero for negative x – there cannot be a negative extent of 
uniformity  – so translation invariance would likewise make U(x) vanish everywhere. 
Scale  invariance, however, is altogether more promising, and here we can run 
through a thought-experiment exactly parallel to our earlier one (and similar in spirit to an example given in Jaynes 1968, p. 126).  In this case, however, my 
alter ego  must 
differ from me not in virtue of being translated  in time, but instead in virtue of using a 
different scale  of time – different units of measurement.  Suppose, then, that he 
measures time in deciyears (1/10 year), and like me is trying to work out, a priori , his 
own probability distribution function  U′(x) for how long uniformity can be expected to 
last.  We ask, as before:  Would he reach the same answer?   And again the reply is 
“yes”, because nothing in our purely a priori  knowledge of the universe gives us any 
ground whatever for expecting one unit of temporal measurement to be favoured over 
another.  Hence, as before, my alter ego ’s function U′(x) should be exactly the same as 
my U(x).  However now consider the probability that our functions ascribe for 
uniformity’s lasting t years  – but here, because our scales differ and do not cancel out, 
we must be pedantic and say “ between t years and t years plus δt”.  Just as my year is 
ten of his deciyears, however, so my δt is ten of his δt′, and this too must be taken into 
account.  For the probability in question, therefore, whereas my function delivers the 226 
 result U(t)δt, his delivers the result 10 U′(10t)δt′ (δt and δt′ are of course made 
sufficiently small that variations in U(x) and U′(x) over the range are negligible).  
Again, however, if our distributions are genuinely a priori  and objective they should 
give the same answer to the same question.  So just as in our previous reasoning on Mackie’s behalf, we derive two equations connecting our target functions:  namely 
     
U(x) = U′(x) 
  a n d   U(t)δt = 10 U′(10t)δt′ 
By substituting and cancelling we can immediately conclude that U(x) = 10 U(10x), 
which is we find sufficient to specify at last the form of our long sought-after function:  
Ux ax()= , where a is some constant.  However any value of a is here as good as any 
other, since it cancels out in any Bayesian calculation.  Hence it is simplest to take: 
   Uxx()=1 
as our probability density function for the a priori  expected extent of temporal 
uniformity.  This yields, for the probability of x’s falling within the interval ( a, b): 
    1
xabdx b a∫=−ln( ) ln( )  
and hence it is commonly called the log uniform  distribution (it is equivalent to a 
uniform distribution from – ∞ to +∞ for the logarithm of x).  Since ln( x) grows linearly 
as x grows exponentially, this does indeed seem to be the natural and correct result if 
scale invariance is to be taken seriously. 227 
 13.6 The Log Uniform Distribution 
It is not only in the analysis of induction that the log uniform distribution can perform 
impressively, for it also seems able to dissolve many of the traditional paradoxes of geometrical probability.  To illustrate, consider the example mentioned earlier of a cubic die known to have an edge between 1
 cm and 3  cm (hence a side area 
correspondingly between 1  cm² and 9  cm² and a volume between 1  cm³ and 27  cm³), and 
imagine that we are asked the question:  “On the basis of these data only, what is the probability that the die’s edge is greater than 2
 cm?”.  Since an edge of 2  cm 
corresponds to a side area of 4  cm² and a volume of 8  cm³, if we follow the traditional 
Principle of Indifference we shall not know whether to assign our uniform distribution to the edge ratios {1:2:3}, the side area ratios {1:4:9}, or the volume ratios {1:8:27}, yet clearly at most one of these can be assigned a uniform function.  However given that ln(
x) grows linearly as x grows exponentially, the three dimensions can easily be 
reconciled by assigning probabilities on the basis of the log uniform distribution – since ln(1) = 0 this gives a probability for the edge/side/volume being greater than 2/4/8 of: 
 
ln( ) ln( )
ln( )32
3−   ln( ) ln( )
ln( )94
9−   ln( ) ln( )
ln( )27 8
27− 
all of which work out to exactly the same (i.e. around 0·369).  So the paradox 
completely disappears. 
The log uniform distribution therefore seems to be a powerful tool for representing 
ignorance about a non-negative real parameter, and as such it might even raise hopes of 228 
 a more general revival of the Principle of Indifference than would be sanctioned by 
Jaynes’ “problem transformation” approach.  But optimism here should be restrained, because for reasons obvious to those with memories of using logarithm tables for school arithmetic, the log uniform function can perform its magic only when dealing with relationships involving multiplication, division, and exponentiation.  As soon as 
addition and subtraction enter the picture, as they do for example with the Von Mises’ 
water and wine paradox (where the combined volume sums to a constant), the distribution loses its power, and we return to the situation of having several possible non-linearly related dimensions of ignorance, with none of them having any obvious claim to logical or epistemological privilege.
84 
Its failure to be a universal panacea does not, of course, impugn the credentials of 
the log uniform distribution as a suitable representation of prior ignorance concerning the value of a non-negative parameter along a single dimension.  But to many the distribution might seem to have a devastating drawback when applied, as we have done with our function 
U(x), to a parameter (in our case the extent of uniformity) which 
ranges over the entire  non-negative half-line from 0 to + ∞, namely, that it lacks a finite 
integral.  Indeed not only does ln( x) tend to  + ∞ as x itself tends to + ∞, but also ln( x) 
tends to -∞ as x tends to 0.  So as a distribution function it is doubly divergent. 
Fortunately we have already seen in Chapter 9 that the theory of probability can be 
formulated apparently perfectly well in a manner that makes room for such “improper” 
                                                
84 For argument along these lines see Milne (1983) pp. 54-5 and Van Fraasen (1989) pp. 313-4. 229 
 distributions.  And it happens that Harold Jeffreys, who devised that formulation, was 
famously enthusiastic about the log uniform distribution.  So far from seeing its double divergence as a liability, he even argues forcefully that it is a considerable virtue: 
If we have to express previous ignorance of the value of a quantity over an infinite range, we have 
seen that ... we shall have to represent certainty by infinity instead of 1; thus the fact that dv v/
0∞∫  
diverges at both limits is a satisfactory feature. 
  (Jeffreys 1961, p. 120) 
It turns out that here Jeffreys means a good deal more than just “satisfactory”, because 
he goes on to make the point that if the function diverged at only the upper limit, then this would imply with virtual certainty that the supposedly “unknown” quantity for which it provides the distribution function must be greater than any given finite value.  Likewise if it diverged only at the lower limit, then this would virtually imply that the unknown quantity must be less than any given positive value.  It is only if the function diverges at both ends, therefore, that it can truly be used to represent complete ignorance on the entire non-negative half-line. 
Jeffreys’ arguments are powerful and interesting, but to follow them further would 
take us too far from our topic.  But to sum up, I believe that together with my Jaynesian derivation in Section §13.5, they show as conclusively as one could reasonably expect that the log uniform distribution, as a representation of our 
a priori  ignorance 
concerning the extent of temporal uniformity, is as good as any other distribution function that we are ever likely to find.  If 
it cannot do the job properly, then I do not 
believe that any other conventional distribution function can do it either. 230 
 13.7 An Inductively Favourable Conclusion? 
Having derived our “objective” prior, we should obviously ask whether it satisfies the 
criterion expounded in §11.2 – is it, in short, “inductively favourable”?  To this crucial question there are three possible answers, and for reasons to be explained in the concluding chapter I am not sure which to prefer. 
The first and most obvious answer is that the log uniform prior is inductively 
favourable to a supreme degree.  Once uniformity has succeeded in persisting for any finite time at all, and “cleared” the divergence to infinity that takes place at the origin, then it immediately becomes overwhelmingly likely to last longer than any given finite period.  The log uniform distribution on the interval from 1 (or any other finite value) 
to +
∞, is so to speak “infinitely weighted” towards the upper end.  I find this answer, 
on behalf of the inductive probabilist, embarrassingly strong. 
A second and perhaps more optimistic answer, therefore, is that the log uniform 
prior, because it is scale invariant, ought to be inductively favourable in the same way as the informal and intuitively attractive arguments that we considered in §12.6 when reflecting on Harrod’s unfortunate defence.  Although the infinite weight referred to in the previous answer is certainly a significant technical obstacle, it seems not totally unreasonable to hope that there might be some form of “normalising” analysis which would justify the natural idea that because the log uniform prior is scale invariant, the predictive confirmation that it bestows should also be a meaningfully scale invariant function rather than one that immediately shoots off to infinity.  It is indeed easy to         231 
 formulate such “modest” scale-invariant confirmation functions – the difficulty is to 
justify ignoring the absolute confirmation that is always there for the asking by pushing things all the way to the limit.
85 
The third, and pessimistic, answer is that the problems alluded to above are 
intrinsic to the use of an “improper” prior for inference of this radically a priori  type.  
When infinities appear in the equations, it might plausibly be said, all hope of 
coherence disappears.86  If this is indeed the correct answer to our question, then the 
force of the reasoning explained in this chapter, which I believe to be considerable, would tell not in 
favour  of the inductive probabilist but against  him.  The argument in 
§13.5, in particular, seems to me to be incontrovertible, in so far as it succeeds in showing that 
if it is appropriate to expect complete ignorance about a “scale” parameter 
to be representable by a probability distribution function at all, then the log uniform 
distribution is the only possible choice.  If this choice is in fact ultimately incoherent, then the inductivist 
modus ponens  has become a sceptical modus tollens . 
                                                
85 An obvious possib ility here, taking a hint from Harrod’s strategy, is to focus on a conditional 
probability, for example the probability that uniformity will continue for at least as long as it has done already, on the “modest” assumption that it will last altogether at most ten times that long .  This indeed 
gives a scale-invariant result (namely ln(5)/ln(10) or roughly 0·7, independently of the length of the 
uniformity), but it seems paradoxical to fix an arbitrary limit at a tenfold extension of uniformity, when 
greater extension will always yield a stronger result. 
86 As no doubt would indeed be said by most statisticians, who will typically take the attitude 
advocated in the text Box and Tiao (1973, p. 21): “improper ... density functions ... are frequently employed to represent the local  behavior of the prior distribution in the region where the likelihood is 
appreciable, but not over its entire range.  By supposing that to a sufficient approximate the prior ... 
suitably tails to zero outside [that region] we ensure that the priors actually used are proper.” 232 
 233 
 PART III  
CONCLUSION 234 
 235 
 Chapter 14  Induction Defended 
or Hume Victorious? 
Modus Ponens , or Modus Tollens ? 
I shall here try to come at least partly off the fence onto which I climbed at the end of 
the last chapter, and to answer the crucial question:  Does the derivation in Section 13.5 of the log uniform distribution, as the “objective” prior for which we had been seeking since Chapter 11, constitute the basis of a probabilistic defence of induction? 
My somewhat double-edged answer is as follows: 
•  
• If it is in principle possible to represent our utter ignorance  of a parameter on 
the entire non-negative half-line by a conventional distribution function;  and 
• if it is then legitimate to use that distribution function to draw Bayesian 
inferences about that parameter; 
• then the derivation in §13.5 of the log uniform function as a prior probability 
distribution for the extent of total uniformity can (probably) provide such a 
basis for making inductively favourable inferences. 236 
 This statement is deliberately very guarded, and I confess to being less than 
completely sure whether it is more appropriate to regard the last chapter as a modus 
ponens  in favour of induction or as a modus tollens  against one of the antecedents of 
the above conditional.  However I shall very briefly recite my reasons for being significantly more inclined in the latter direction. 
First , I continue to find it extremely implausible that substantial epistemological 
conclusions such as this should be drawn by pure reason. 
Secondly , despite Jeffreys’ advocacy of the log uniform distribution, and despite 
my conviction that it is almost certainly the inductive probabilist’s best (and maybe only) hope, I continue to feel very uneasy about the use of improper prior distributions except as a convenient approximation to proper priors.  Without considerably more investigation and understanding of the implications of their use, I cannot express any confidence that the results they yield are fully meaningful and coherent.
87 
Thirdly , I believe that there are strong theoretical grounds, which I have not had 
space to explore here, for refusing to accept that knowledge and ignorance can adequately be modelled by conventional probability distribution functions.  In most cases, perhaps, they perform reasonably well, but when extreme situations of absolute 
                                               
 
87 Relevant discussions of non-informative improper priors are provided by, for example, Berger 
(1985) pp. 82-90; Rosenkrantz (1977) pp. 62-83; Seidenfeld (1979b); Walley (1991) pp. 226-35 and Zellner (1971) pp. 41-53.  The issues are too complex to address here, but I am not inclined to be 
particularly optimistic on the Logical Bayesian’s behalf. 237 
 ignorance are in question, the cracks begin to show.88  Interval-valued probabilities and 
other richer and more flexible models seem in such cases better motivated, but these provide an unlikely basis for a defence of induction, precisely because they put fewer constraints on coherent degrees of belief, ignorance and indecision.
89 
On the whole, therefore, and though I would be delighted to find some way of 
proving coherent and persuasive the positive conclusions of my previous chapter, if I 
had to bet, I would bet on Hume.  It seems to me that the results of this thesis have given excellent 
inductive  grounds for confidence that he will ultimately emerge 
victorious against every attempt to refute him.  And just as Hume did, I trust induction. 
 
____________________ 
                                                
88 A personal hunch here is that the development and incorporation into probability theory of 
Keynes’ concept of “weight” (1921, chapter VI) might help to explain in a well-motivated manner why 
conventional probability models break down in situations of extreme ignorance (somewhat as arithmetical division breaks down when the denominator is zero).  As far as I know the only significant recent discussions of Keynesian weight are those of Cohen ( 1985, and 1989 §14), who sees it as relating 
closely to the “method of relevant variables” developed in his (1970) and (1977). 
89 Interval-valued (and therefore only partially ordered) probabilities were pioneered by Keynes 
(1921, chapter XV), Koopman (1940) and Good (e.g. 1950 pp. 40, 82-3; 1962), but developed much further by Kyburg, whose work provides perhaps the most extensive philosophical discussion currently available  (e.g. 1974, especially chapter 10).  A more r ecent and monumentally thorough but 
predominantly technical treatment is provided by Walley (1991), who gives an excellent survey of such work and develops his own theory at great length.  Howson (1995) pp. 13-14 is useful for a very brief 
guide to some recent developments. 238 
 239 
 APPENDICES 240 
 241 
 APPENDIX 1: 
An authoritative text of Section IV of 
Hume’s First Enquiry   
Though tolerably good, the familiar Selby-Bigge text of the Enquiry Concerning 
Human Understanding , based on the first posthumous edition of 1777, is marred in 
particular by editorial interference in capitalisation, spelling, and most seriously in punctuation.  Nidditch’s third edition of 1975 brought some improvement, but still left a text significantly deficient by modern scholarly standards.  This appendix contains a corrected version of the Section IV text (annotated with the Selby-Bigge page numbers in square brackets), which has been checked in detail against the copy of the 1777 edition in the Brotherton Library of the University of Leeds, and which indicates in 
footnotes marked thus: “
♦” all modifications from the text of the 1772 edition (the last 
to appear under Hume’s direction), again checked personally against a copy in the 
Brotherton Library.  My own preference is for the 1777 edition, on the grounds that differences between the two can generally be presumed to result from Hume’s final editorial directions.  However opinions differ as to which of the two texts should be taken as the more authoritative, and the forthcoming Oxford critical edition will be using the 1772 rather than the 1777 as its copytext.  The text that follows has been compared against the preliminary electronic release of that copytext, which is indeed absolutely accurate (in respect of Section IV, though not entirely elsewhere) as checked against the Brotherton copy of the 1772 edition. 242 
 243 
 [25] SECTION IV.  
SCEPTICAL DOUBTS concerning the OPERA-
TIONS of the UNDERSTANDING. 
P  A  R  T      I. 
ALL the objects of human reason or enquiry may naturally be divided into two kinds, 
to wit, Relations of Ideas ,♦ and Matters of Fact .  Of the first kind are the sciences of 
Geometry, Algebra, and Arithmetic; and in short, every affirmation, which is either intuitively or demonstratively certain.  
That the square of the hypothenuse is equal to 
the square of the two sides , is a proposition, which expresses a relation between these 
figures.  That three times five is equal to the half of thirty , expresses a relation between 
these numbers.  Propositions of this kind are discoverable by the mere operation of thought, without dependence on what is any where existent in the universe.  Though there never were a circle or triangle in nature, the truths, demonstrated by E
UCLID , 
would for ever retain their certainty and evidence. 
Matters of fact, which are the second objects of human reason, are not ascertained 
in the same manner; nor is our evidence of their truth, however great, of a like nature with the foregoing.  The contrary of every matter of fact is still possible; because it can 
never imply a contradiction, and is conceived by the mind with the same facility and 
distinctness, as if ever so conformable to reality.  
That the  [26] sun will not rise to-
morrow  is no less intelligible a proposition, and implies no more contradiction, than the 
affirmation, that it will rise .  We should in vain, therefore, attempt to demonstrate its 
                                                
♦ 77  to wit, Relations of Ideas ,    72  viz. Relations of Ideas  244 
 falsehood.  Were it demonstratively false, it would imply a contradiction, and could 
never be distinctly conceived by the mind. 
It may, therefore, be a subject worthy of curiosity, to enquire what is the nature of 
that evidence, which assures us of any real existence and matter of fact, beyond the 
present testimony of our senses, or the records of our memory.  This part of 
philosophy, it is observable, has been little cultivated, either by the ancients or moderns; and therefore our doubts and errors, in the prosecution of so important an enquiry, may be the more excusable; while we march through such difficult paths, without any guide or direction.  They may even prove useful, by exciting curiosity, and 
destroying that implicit faith and security, which is the bane of all reasoning and free 
enquiry.  The discovery of defects in the common philosophy, if any such there be, will not, I presume, be a discouragement, but rather an incitement, as is usual, to attempt something more full and satisfactory, than has yet been proposed to the public. 
All reasonings concerning matter of fact seem to be founded on the relation of 
Cause and Effect .♦  By means of that relation alone we can go beyond the evidence of 
our memory and senses.  If you were to ask a man, why he believes any matter of fact, which is absent; for instance, that his friend is in the country, or in F
RANCE ; he would 
give you a reason; and this reason would be some other fact; as a letter received from 
him, or the knowledge of his former resolutions and promises.  A man, finding a watch or any other machine in a desart island, would conclude, that there had once been men in that island.  All our reasonings concerning fact are of the same nature.  And [27] 
here it is constantly supposed, that there is a connexion between the present fact and 
that which is inferred from it.  Were there nothing to bind them together, the inference would be entirely precarious.  The hearing of an articulate voice and rational discourse in the dark assures us of the presence of some person: Why? because these are the 
effects of the human make and fabric, and closely connected with it.  If we anatomize 
all the other reasonings of this nature, we shall find, that they are founded on the relation of cause and effect, and that this relation is either near or remote, direct or 
                                               
 
♦ 77  Cause and Effect     72  Cause  and Effect  245 
 collateral.  Heat and light are collateral effects of fire, and the one effect may justly be 
inferred from the other. 
If we would satisfy ourselves, therefore, concerning the nature of that evidence, 
which assures us of matters of fact, we must enquire how we arrive at the knowledge of 
cause and effect. 
I shall venture to affirm, as a general proposition, which admits of no exception, 
that the knowledge of this relation is not, in any instance, attained by reasonings à 
priori ; but arises entirely from experience, when we find, that any particular objects are 
constantly conjoined with each other.  Let an object be presented to a man of ever so 
strong natural reason and abilities; if that object be entirely new to him, he will not be 
able, by the most accurate examination of its sensible qualities, to discover any of its causes or effects.  A
DAM, though his rational faculties be supposed, at the very first, 
entirely perfect, could not have inferred from the fluidity,♦ and transparency of water, 
that it would suffocate him, or from the light and warmth of fire, that it would consume 
him.  No object ever discovers, by the qualities which appear to the senses, either the causes which produced it, or the effects
♦ which will arise from it; nor can our reason, 
unassisted by experience, ever draw any inference concerning real existence and matter 
of fact. 
[28] This proposition, that causes and effects are disc overable, not by reason, but 
by experience , will readily be admitted with regard to such objects, as we remember to 
have once been altogether unknown to us; since we must be conscious of the utter 
inability, which we then lay under, of foretelling, what would arise from them.  Present 
two smooth pieces of marble to a man, who has no tincture of natural philosophy; he will never discover, that they will adhere together, in such a manner as to require great force to separate them in a direct line, while they make so small a resistance to a lateral 
pressure.  Such events, as bear little analogy to the common course of nature, are also 
                                               
 
♦ 77  fluidity,    72  fluidity 
♦ 77  causes which produced it, or the effects    72  causes, which produced it, or the effects, 246 
 readily confessed to be known only by experience; nor does any man imagine that the 
explosion of gunpowder, or the attraction of a loadstone, could ever be discovered by arguments 
à priori .  In like manner, when an effect is supposed to depend upon an 
intricate machinery or secret structure of parts, we make no difficulty in attributing all 
our knowledge of it to experience.  Who will assert, that he can give the ultimate 
reason, why milk or bread is proper nourishment for a man, not for a lion or a tyger? 
But the same truth may not appear, at first sight, to have the same evidence with 
regard to events, which have become familiar to us from our first appearance in the world, which bear a close analogy to the whole course of nature, and which are 
supposed to depend on the simple qualities of objects, without any secret structure of 
parts.  We are apt to imagine, that we could discover these effects by the mere operation of our reason, without experience.  We fancy, that were we brought, on a sudden, into this world, we could at first have inferred, that one Billiard-ball would 
communicate motion to another upon impulse; and that we needed not to have waited 
for the event, in order to pronounce with certainty concerning it.  Such is the influence of custom, that, where it is strongest, it not only covers our natural ignorance, but [29] even conceals itself, and seems not to take place, merely because it is found in the 
highest degree. 
But to convince us, that all the laws of nature, and all the operations of bodies 
without exception, are known only by experience, the following reflections may, perhaps, suffice.  Were any object presented to us, and were we required to pronounce 
concerning the effect, which will result from it, without consulting past observation; 
after what manner, I beseech you, must the mind proceed in this operation?  It must invent or imagine some event, which it ascribes to the object as its effect; and it is plain that this invention must be entirely arbitrary.  The mind can never possibly find the 
effect in the supposed cause, by the most accurate scrutiny and examination.  For the 
effect is totally different from the cause, and consequently can never be discovered in it.  Motion in the second Billiard-ball is a quite distinct event from motion in the first; nor is there any thing in the one to suggest the smallest hint of the other.  A stone or 
piece of metal raised into the air, and left without any support, immediately falls: But 
to consider the matter 
à priori , is there any thing we discover in this situation, which 247 
 can beget the idea of a downward, rather than an upward, or any other motion, in the 
stone or metal? 
And as the first imagination or invention of a particular effect, in all natural 
operations, is arbitrary, where we consult not experience; so must we also esteem the 
supposed tye or connexion between the cause and effect, which binds them together, 
and renders it impossible, that any other effect could result from the operation of that cause.  When I see, for instance, a Billiard-ball moving in a straight line towards another; even suppose motion in the second ball should by accident be suggested to me, as the result of their contact or impulse; may I not conceive, that a hundred 
different events might as well follow from that cause?  May not both these balls remain 
at absolute rest?  May not the [30] first ball return in a straight line, or leap off from the second in any line or direction?  All these suppositions are consistent and conceivable.  Why then should we give the preference to one, which is no more consistent or 
conceivable than the rest?  All our reasonings 
à priori  will never be able to shew us 
any foundation for this preference. 
In a word, then, every effect is a distinct event from its cause.  It could not, 
therefore, be discovered in the cause, and the first invention or conception of it, 
à priori , must be entirely arbitrary.  And even after it is suggested, the conjunction of it 
with the cause must appear equally arbitrary; since there are always many other effects, which, to reason, must seem fully as consistent and natural.  In vain, therefore, should we pretend to determine any single event, or infer any cause or effect, without the 
assistance of observation and experience. 
Hence we may discover the reason, why no philosopher, who is rational and 
modest, has ever pretended to assign the ultimate cause of any natural operation, or to show distinctly the action of that power, which produces any single effect in the 
universe.  It is confessed, that the utmost effort of human reason is, to reduce the 
principles, productive of natural phaenomena, to a greater simplicity, and to resolve the many particular effects into a few general causes, by means of reasonings from analogy, experience, and observation.  But as to the causes of these general causes, we 
should in vain attempt their discovery; nor shall we ever be able to satisfy ourselves, by 248 
 any particular explication of them.  These ultimate springs and principles are totally 
shut up from human curiosity and enquiry.  Elasticity, gravity, cohesion of parts, communication of motion by impulse; these are probably the ultimate causes and principles which we shall ever discover in nature; and we may esteem ourselves 
sufficiently happy, if, by accurate enquiry and reasoning, we can trace up the particular 
phaenomena [31] to, or near to, these general principles.  The most perfect philosophy of the natural kind only staves off our ignorance a little longer: As perhaps the most perfect philosophy of the moral or metaphysical kind serves only to discover larger portions of it.
♦  Thus the observation of human blindness and weakness is the result of 
all philosophy, and meets us, at every turn, in spite of our endeavours to elude or 
avoid it. 
Nor is geometry, when taken into the assistance of natural philosophy, ever able to 
remedy this defect, or lead us into the knowledge of ultimate causes, by all that 
accuracy of reasoning, for which it is so justly celebrated.  Every part of mixed 
mathematics proceeds upon the supposition, that certain laws are established by nature in her operations; and abstract reasonings are employed, either to assist experience in the discovery of these laws, or to determine their influence in particular instances, 
where it depends upon any precise degree of distance and quantity.  Thus, it is a law of 
motion, discovered by experience, that the moment or force of any body in motion is in the compound ratio or proportion of its solid contents and its velocity; and consequently, that a small force may remove the greatest obstacle or raise the greatest 
weight, if, by any contrivance or machinery, we can encrease the velocity of that force, 
so as to make it an overmatch for its antagonist.  Geometry assists us in the application of this law, by giving us the just dimensions of all the parts and figures, which can enter into any species of machine; but still the discovery of the law itself is owing 
merely to experience, and all the abstract reasonings in the world could never lead us 
one step towards the knowledge of it.  When we reason 
à priori , and consider merely 
any object or cause, as it appears to the mind, independent of all observation, it never 
                                                
♦ 77  it.    72  our ignorance. 249 
 could suggest to us the notion of any distinct object, such as its effect; much less, shew 
us the inseparable and inviolable connexion between them.  A man must be very sagacious, who could discover by [32] reasoning, that crystal is the effect of heat, and ice of cold, without being previously acquainted with the operation of these qualities. 
 
P  A  R  T      II. 
But we have not, yet,♦ attained any tolerable satisfaction with regard to the 
question first proposed.  Each solution still gives rise to a new question as difficult as 
the foregoing, and leads us on to farther enquiries.  When it is asked, What is the nature 
of all our reasonings concerning matter of fact?  the proper answer seems to be, that 
they are founded on the relation of cause and effect.  When again it is asked, What is 
the foundation of all our reasonings and conclusions concerning that relation?  it may 
be replied in one word, E XPERIENCE .  But if we still carry on our sifting humour, and 
ask, What is the foundation of all conclusions from experience?  this implies a new 
question, which may be of more difficult solution and explication.  Philosophers, that give themselves airs of superior wisdom and sufficiency, have a hard task, when they 
encounter persons of inquisitive dispositions, who push them from every corner, to 
which they retreat, and who are sure at last to bring them to some dangerous dilemma.  The best expedient to prevent this confusion, is to be modest in our pretensions; and even to discover the difficulty ourselves before it is objected to us.  By this means, we 
may make a kind of merit of our very ignorance. 
I shall content myself, in this section, with an easy task, and shall pretend only to 
give a negative answer to the question here proposed.  I say then, that, even after we have experience of the operations of cause and effect, our conclusions from that 
                                               
 
♦ 77  yet,    72  as yet, 250 
 experience are not founded on reasoning, or any process of the understanding.  This 
answer we must endeavour, both to explain and to defend. 
It must certainly be allowed, that nature has kept us at a great distance from all her 
secrets, and has afforded [33] us only the knowledge of a few superficial qualities of 
objects; while she conceals from us those powers and principles, on which the 
influence of these objects entirely depends.  Our senses inform us of the colour, weight, and consistence of bread; but neither sense nor reason can ever inform us of those qualities, which fit it for the nourishment and support of a human body.  Sight or feeling conveys an idea of the actual motion of bodies; but as to that wonderful force or 
power, which would carry on a moving body for ever in a continued change of place, 
and which bodies never lose but by communicating it to others; of this we cannot form the most distant conception.  But notwithstanding this ignorance of natural powers * and principles, we always presume, when
♦ we see like sensible qualities, that they have 
like secret powers, and expect, that effects, similar to those♦ which we have 
experienced, will follow from them.  If a body of like colour and consistence with that bread,
♦ which we have formerly eat, be presented to us, we make no scruple of 
repeating the experiment, and foresee, with certainty, like nourishment and support.  
Now this is a process of the mind or thought, of which I would willingly know the 
foundation.  It is allowed on all hands, that there is no known connexion between the sensible qualities and the secret powers; and consequently, that the mind is not led to form such a conclusion concerning their constant and regular conjunction, by any thing 
which it knows of their nature.  As to past 
Experience , it can be allowed to give direct  
                                                
* The word, Power, is here used in a loose and popular sense.  The more accurate explication of it 
would give additional evidence to this argument.  See Sect. 7. 
♦ 77  when    72  where 
♦ 77  those    72  those, 
♦ 77  that bread,    72  that of bread, 251 
 and certain  information of those precise objects only, and that precise period of time, 
which fell under its cognizance: But why this experience should be extended to future times, and to other objects, which
♦ for aught we know, may be only in [34] appearance 
similar; this is the main question on which I would insist.  The bread, which I formerly 
eat, nourished me; that is, a body of such sensible qualities, was, at that time, endued 
with such secret powers: But does it follow, that other bread must also nourish me at another time, and that like sensible qualities must always be attended with like secret powers?  The consequence seems nowise necessary.  At least, it must be acknowledged, that there is here a consequence drawn by the mind; that there is a 
certain step taken; a process of thought, and an inference, which wants to be explained.  
These two propositions are far from being the same, 
I have found that such an object 
has always been attended with such an effect , and I foresee, that other objects, which 
are, in appearance, similar, will be attended with similar effects .  I shall allow, if you 
please, that the one proposition may justly be inferred from the other: I know in fact, 
that it always is inferred.  But if you insist, that the inference is made by a chain of reasoning, I desire you to produce that reasoning.  The connexion between these propositions is not intuitive.  There is required a medium, which may enable the mind 
to draw such an inference, if indeed it be drawn by reasoning and argument.  What that 
medium is, I must confess, passes my comprehension; and it is incumbent on those to produce it, who assert, that it really exists, and is the origin of all our conclusions concerning matter of fact. 
This negative argument must certainly, in process of time, become altogether 
convincing, if many penetrating and able philosophers shall turn their enquiries this way; and no one be ever able to discover any connecting proposition or intermediate step, which supports the understanding in this conclusion.  But as the question is yet 
new, every reader may not trust so far to his own penetration, as to conclude, because 
an argument escapes his enquiry, that therefore it does not really exist.  For this [35] reason it may be requisite to venture upon a more difficult task; and enumerating all the 
                                               
 
♦ 77  which    72  which, 252 
 branches of human knowledge, endeavour to shew, that none of them can afford such 
an argument. 
All reasonings may be divided into two kinds, namely♦ demonstrative reasoning, 
or that concerning relations of ideas, and moral reasoning, or that concerning matter of 
fact and existence.  That there are no demonstrative arguments in the case, seems 
evident; since it implies no contradiction, that the course of nature may change, and that an object, seemingly like those which we have experienced, may be attended with different or contrary effects.  May I not clearly and distinctly conceive, that a body, falling from the clouds, and which, in all other respects, resembles snow, has yet the 
taste of salt or feeling of fire?  Is there any more intelligible proposition than to affirm, 
that all the trees will flourish in D
ECEMBER  and J ANUARY , and decay in M AY and 
JUNE?  Now whatever is intelligible, and can be distinctly conceived, implies no 
contradiction, and can never be proved false by any demonstrative argument or abstract 
reasoning à priori . 
If we be, therefore, engaged by arguments to put trust in past experience, and make 
it the standard of our future judgment, these arguments must be probable only, or such as regard matter of fact and real existence, according to the division above mentioned.  
But that there is no argument of this kind, must appear, if our explication of that 
species of reasoning be admitted as solid and satisfactory.  We have said, that all arguments concerning existence are founded on the relation of cause and effect; that our knowledge of that relation is derived entirely from experience; and that all our 
experimental conclusions proceed upon the supposition, that the future will be 
conformable to the past.  To endeavour, therefore, the proof of this last supposition by probable arguments, or arguments regarding [36] existence, must be evidently going in a circle, and taking that for granted, which is the very point in question. 
                                               
 
♦ 77  namely    72  viz. 253 
 In reality, all arguments from experience are founded on the similarity, which we 
discover among natural objects, and by which we are induced to expect effects similar to those, which we have found to follow from such objects.  And though none but a fool or madman will ever pretend to dispute the authority of experience, or to reject 
that great guide of human life; it may surely be allowed a philosopher to have so much 
curiosity at least, as to examine the principle of human nature, which gives this mighty authority to experience, and makes us draw advantage from that similarity, which nature has placed among different objects.  From causes, which appear 
similar , we 
expect similar effects.  This is the sum of all our experimental conclusions.  Now it 
seems evident, that, if this conclusion were formed by reason, it would be as perfect at 
first, and upon one instance, as after ever so long a course of experience.  But the case is far otherwise.  Nothing so like as eggs; yet no one, on account of this appearing similarity, expects the same taste and relish in all of them.  It is only after a long course 
of uniform experiments in any kind, that we attain a firm reliance and security with 
regard to a particular event.  Now where is that process of reasoning, which, from one instance, draws a conclusion, so different from that which it infers from a hundred
♦ 
instances, that are nowise different from that single one?  This question I propose as 
much for the sake of information, as with an intention of raising difficulties.  I cannot 
find, I cannot imagine any such reasoning.  But I keep my mind still open to instruction, if any one will vouchsafe to bestow it on me. 
Should it be said, that, from a number of uniform experiments, we 
infer a 
connexion between the sensible qualities and the secret powers; this, I must confess, 
seems the [37] same difficulty, couched in different terms.  The question still recurs, on
♦ what process of argument this inference  is founded?  Where is the medium, the 
interposing ideas, which join propositions so very wide of each other?  It is confessed, 
                                                
♦ 77  a hundred    72  an hundred 
♦ 77  on    72  On 254 
 that the colour, consistence,♦ and other sensible qualities of bread appear not, of 
themselves, to have any connexion with the secret powers of nourishment and support.  For otherwise we could infer these secret powers from the first appearance of these sensible qualities, without the aid of experience; contrary to the sentiment of all 
philosophers, and contrary to plain matter of fact.  Here then is our natural state of 
ignorance with regard to the powers and influence of all objects.  How is this remedied by experience?  It only shews us a number of uniform effects, resulting from certain objects, and teaches us, that those particular objects, at that particular time, were endowed with such powers and forces.  When a new object, endowed with similar 
sensible qualities, is produced, we expect similar powers and forces, and look for a like 
effect.  From a body of like colour and consistence with bread, we expect like nourishment and support.  But this surely is a step or progress of the mind, which wants to be explained.  When a man says, 
I have found, in all past instances, such sensible 
qualities conjoined with such secret powers:  And when he says, similar sensible 
qualities will always be conjoined with similar secret powers ; he is not guilty of a 
tautology, nor are these propositions in any respect the same.  You say that the one proposition is an inference from the other.  But you must confess
♦ that the inference is 
not intuitive; neither is it demonstrative: Of what nature is it then?  To say it is 
experimental, is begging the question.  For all inferences from experience suppose, as their foundation, that the future will resemble the past, and that similar powers will be conjoined with similar sensible qualities.  If there be any suspicion, that the course of 
nature may [38] change, and that the past may be no rule for the future, all experience 
becomes useless, and can give rise to no inference or conclusion.  It is impossible, therefore, that any arguments from experience can prove this resemblance of the past to the future; since all these arguments are founded on the supposition of that 
resemblance.  Let the course of things be allowed hitherto ever so regular; that alone, 
without some new argument or inference, proves not, that, for the future, it will 
                                               
 
♦ 77  consistence,    72  consistence 
♦ 77  confess    72  confess, 255 
 continue so.  In vain do you pretend to have learned the nature of bodies from your past 
experience.  Their secret nature, and consequently, all their effects and influence, may change, without any change in their sensible qualities.  This happens sometimes, and with regard to some objects: Why may it not happen always, and with regard to all 
objects?  What logic, what process of argument secures you against this supposition?  
My practice, you say, refutes my doubts.  But you mistake the purport of my question.  As an agent, I am quite satisfied in the point; but as a philosopher, who has some share of curiosity, I will not say scepticism, I want to learn the foundation of this inference.  No reading, no enquiry has yet been able to remove my difficulty, or give me 
satisfaction in a matter of such importance.  Can I do better than propose the difficulty 
to the public, even though, perhaps, I have small hopes of obtaining a solution?  We shall at least, by this means, be sensible of our ignorance, if we do not augment our knowledge. 
I must confess, that a man is guilty of unpardonable arrogance, who concludes, 
because an argument has escaped his own investigation, that therefore it does not really exist.  I must also confess, that, though all the learned, for several ages, should have employed themselves in fruitless search upon any subject, it may still, perhaps, be rash 
to conclude positively, that the subject must, therefore, pass all human comprehension.  
Even though we examine [39] all the sources of our knowledge, and conclude them unfit for such a subject, there may still remain a suspicion, that the enumeration is not compleat, or the examination not accurate.  But with regard to the present subject, there 
are some considerations, which seem to remove all this accusation of arrogance or 
suspicion of mistake. 
It is certain, that the most ignorant and stupid peasants, nay infants, nay even brute 
beasts, improve by experience, and learn the qualities of natural objects, by observing 
the effects, which result from them.  When a child has felt the sensation of pain from 
touching the flame of a candle, he will be careful not to put his hand near any candle; but will expect a similar effect from a cause, which is similar in its sensible qualities and appearance.  If you assert, therefore, that the understanding of the child is led into 
this conclusion by any process of argument or ratiocination, I may justly require you to 
produce that argument; nor have you any pretence to refuse so equitable a demand.  256 
 You cannot say, that the argument is abstruse, and may possibly escape your enquiry; 
since you confess, that it is obvious to the capacity of a mere infant.  If you hesitate, therefore, a moment, or if, after reflection, you produce any intricate or profound argument, you, in a manner, give up the question, and confess, that it is not reasoning 
which engages us to suppose the past resembling the future, and to expect similar 
effects from causes, which are, to appearance, similar.  This is the proposition which I intended to enforce in the present section.  If I be right, I pretend not to have made any mighty discovery.  And if I be wrong, I must acknowledge myself to be indeed a very backward scholar; since I cannot now discover an argument, which, it seems, was 
perfectly familiar to me, long before I was out of my cradle. 
____________________ 257 
 APPENDIX 2: 
Structure diagrams of the Treatise  and 
Enquiry  arguments, with Hume’s 
statement of their stages 
The first part of this thesis was largely organised around the task of constructing a 
reliable structure diagram for Hume’s argument concerning induction as it is presented in Section IV of the 
Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding .  This appendix 
repeats that structure diagram, together with its analysis into “logical blocks” and the table of quotations from the 
Enquiry  which correspond to each proposition that the 
diagram contains.  First, however, are provided for comparison a similar pair of structure diagrams representing the argument as it appears in Section I iii 6 of the 
Treatise of Human Nature , again accompanied by a table containing the relevant 
quotations from Hume’s own words.  Since the purpose of this thesis has been to investigate the structure and philosophical significance of Hume’s 
mature  thought, it 
seemed inappropriate to devote within it the space that would have been necessary for a precise paragraph-by-paragraph account of the 
Treatise  argument as well as that of the 
Enquiry .  However the material in this appendix should enable the interested reader to 
work out in some detail how my interpretation of the Treatise  argument would differ 
from that of the Enquiry , and to see in particular how the claims made in §1.2 
regarding the inferiority of the Treatise  presentation can be substantiated. 258 
   
Hume’s Argument Concerning Induction (from the Treatise of Human Nature ) 259  
 
 
 
(4a) If any causal inference were 
a priori , this would imply the 
impossibility of conceiving 
things otherwise    
(7a) The experience on which 
causal inferences are based is the 
memory of observed constant 
conjunctions 
       
   
 
  
(5) Causal relations cannot be 
known a priori , but can only be 
discovered by experience 
  
(8a) If reason determined us to 
make causal inferences it would 
have to proceed upon the 
supposition that nature is 
uniform, and in particular, that 
similar causes will in the future 
have similar effects to those 
which they have had in the past 
[the Uniformity Principle or UP]   
  
 
 
(13) The contrary of UP can be 
distinctly conceived, and is 
therefore possible 
 
   
  
 
 
(12) All (good) reasonings are 
either demonstrative (yielding 
“knowledge”) or probable 
  
(19a)  CONCLUSION  
Causal inferences are not 
founded on reason, and hence 
it is not reason [but instead 
the imagination] that engages 
us to make such inferences  
(4) Any effect is quite distinct 
from its cause, and many 
alternative effects are equally 
conceivable         
(14) There is no (good) demon-
strative argument for UP 
 
     
     
(8) All probable arguments are 
founded on the supposition that 
nature is uniform [UP] 
 
 
   
(16) Any probable argument for 
UP would be circular 
   
(17) There is no good argument 
of any kind for UP 
   
   
(1a) Probable arguments start 
from the evidence of our memory 
and senses, but go beyond it 
   
(1) Only the relation of cause 
and effect can take us beyond the 
evidence of our memory and 
senses 
   Note that Hume’s talk of inferences “from the impression to the 
idea” (etc) has here been abbreviated, for obvious reasons of 
convenience, to “causal inferences” (as was done with Stove’s 
structure diagram in §5.1).  This language is to be clearly 
distinguished from Hume’s talk of “probable” inferences, which 
occurs in this version of the argument at quite different stages.  260 
The Main Logical Blocks of the Treatise  Argument  
 
 
 
(4a) If any causal inference were 
a priori , this would imply the 
impossibility of conceiving 
things otherwise    
 
 
  
 
 
B (7a) The experience on which 
causal inferences are based is the 
memory of observed constant 
conjunctions 
       
 
  
 
               A    
 
  
(5) Causal relations cannot be 
known a priori , but can only be 
discovered by experience 
  
(8a) If reason determined us to 
make causal inferences it would 
have to proceed upon the 
supposition that nature is 
uniform, and in particular, that 
similar causes will in the future 
have similar effects to those 
which they have had in the past 
[the Uniformity Principle or UP]   
  
 
 
(13) The contrary of UP can be 
distinctly conceived, and is 
therefore possible 
 
   
  
 
 
(12) All (good) reasonings are 
either demonstrative (yielding 
“knowledge”) or probable 
  
(19a)  CONCLUSION  
Causal inferences are not 
founded on reason, and hence 
it is not reason [but instead 
the imagination] that engages 
us to make such inferences  
(4) Any effect is quite distinct 
from its cause, and many 
alternative effects are equally 
conceivable      
 
C    
(14) There is no (good) demon-
strative argument for UP 
 
     
        D  
     
(8) All probable arguments are 
founded on the supposition that 
nature is uniform [UP] 
 
 
   
(16) Any probable argument for 
UP would be circular 
   
(17) There is no good argument 
of any kind for UP 
   
   
(1a) Probable arguments start 
from the evidence of our memory 
and senses, but go beyond it 
   
(1) Only the relation of cause 
and effect can take us beyond the 
evidence of our memory and 
senses 
   This argument is in some respects simpler than that in the Enquiry (it has fewer 
logical blocks, and in particular takes for granted that “argument” is the only 
conceivable means of justification for UP).  However its central heart C is more 
complex, owing to Hume’s failure to focus explicitly on the entire category of probable reasoning (as opposed to causal inferences “from the impression to the idea”) right from the start.  Hence his need here for the separate introduction of 
(1)/(1a) to establish (8) even after the first two stages have been completed.
  
Hume’s Statement of the Stages of the Treatise  Argument  261 The proposition numbers have been chosen so as to highlight as far as possible the logical 
parallels with the Enquiry version of the argument as analysed in the main body of the thesis 
 
(1a) T89: “in all probable reasonings there [is] something present to the mind, and ... from this we infer 
something connected with it, which is not seen nor remember’d.” 
 
(1) T89: “The only connexion or relation of objects, which can lead us beyond the immediate impressions of 
our memory and senses, is that of cause and effect” 
 
(4a) T87: “Such an inference wou’d amount to knowledge, and wou’d imply the absolute contradiction and 
impossibility of conceiving anything different.” 
 
(4) T87: “But as all distinct ideas are separable, ‘tis evident there can be no impossibility of that kind.  When 
we pass from a present impression to the idea of any object, we might possibly have separated the 
idea from the impression, and have substituted any other idea in its room.” 
 
(5) T86: “the inference we draw from cause to effect, is not deriv’d merely from a survey of these particular 
objects, and from such a penetration into their essences as may discover the dependence of the one upon the other.” 
 T87: “‘Tis therefore by EXPERIENCE only, that we can infer the existence of one object from that of 
another.” 
 
(7a) T87: “The nature of experience is this.  We remember to have had frequent instances of the existence of 
one species of objects; and also remember, that the individuals of another species of objects have 
always attended them, and have existed in a regular order of contiguity and succession with regard to them. ... Without any farther ceremony, we call the one cause  and the other effect , and infer the 
existence of the one from that of the other. ... But in all cases, wherein we reason concerning them, there is only one perceiv’d or remember’d, and the other is supply’d in conformity to our past experience.” 
 T89-90 “The idea of cause and effect is deriv’d from experience , which informs us, that such particular 
objects, in all past instances, have been constantly conjoin’d with each other: And as an object 
similar to one of these is suppos’d to be immediately present in its impression, we thence presume on the existence of one similar to its usual attendant.”
  (8a) T89: If reason determin’d us [to infer an idea from the impression of its usual attendant], it wou’d proceed 
upon that principle, that instances of which we have had no experience, must resemble those of 
which we have had experience, and that the course of nature continues always uniformly the same . 
 
(8) T90: “probability is founded on the presumption of a resemblance betwixt those objects, of which we 
have had experience, and those, of which we have had none” 
 
(12) T89: “In order therefore to clear up this matter, let us consider all the arguments, upon which such a 
proposition may be suppos’d to be founded; and as these must be deriv’d either from knowledge  or 
probability , let us cast our eye on each of these degrees of evidence, and see whether they afford any 
just conclusion of this nature.” 
 
(13) T89: “We can at least conceive a change in the course of nature; which sufficiently proves, that such a 
change is not absolutely impossible.” 
 
(14) T89: “there can be no demonstrative  arguments to prove, that those instances, of which we have had no 
experience, resemble those, of which we have had experience .” 
 
(16) T90: “and therefore ‘tis impossible this presumption can arise from probability.  The same principle 
cannot be both the cause and effect of another” 
 
(17) T90: “Should anyone think to elude this argument; and ... pretend that all conclusions from causes and 
effects are built on solid reasoning; I can only desire, that this reasoning may be produc’d” 
 T91-2 “We suppose, but are never able to prove, that there must be a resemblance between those objects, 
of which we have had experience, and those which lie beyond the reach of our discovery.” 
 
(19a) T91: “Thus not only our reason fails us in the discovery of the ultimate connexion  of causes and effects, 
but even after experience has inform’d us of their constant conjunction , ‘tis impossible for us to 
satisfy ourselves by our reason, why we shou’d extend that experience beyond those particular 
instances, which have fallen under our observation.” 
 T92: “When the mind, therefore, passes from the idea or impression of one object to the idea or belief of 
another, it is not determin’d by reason, but by certain principles, which associate together the ideas of these objects, and unite them in the imagination.” 
 262 
   
Figure 1    Hume’s Argument Concerning Induction (from the Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding ) 263 (1) Only the relation of cause 
and effect can take us beyond the 
evidence of our memory and 
senses 
 
 
       
 
 
(7) All arguments from 
experience proceed upon the 
supposition that the future will be 
conformable to the past       
 
(2) All probable arguments 
(moral arguments, reasonings 
concerning matter of fact) are 
founded on the relation of cause 
and effect            
 
 
 
(4) Any effect is quite distinct 
from its cause, and many 
alternative effects are equally 
conceivable   
 
 
(6) All probable arguments 
(moral arguments, reasonings 
concerning matter of fact) are 
founded on experience  
(8) All probable arguments 
(moral arguments, reasonings 
concerning matter of fact) 
proceed upon the supposition that 
nature is uniform, and in 
particular, that similar causes 
will in the future have similar 
effects to those which they have 
had in the past [the Uniformity 
Principle or UP]   
 
 
  
(13) The contrary of UP can be 
distinctly conceived, and is 
therefore possible   
 
 
  
(12) All (good) reasonings are 
either demonstrative or moral 
(i.e. probable)  
(19)  CONCLUSION  
No probable argument (moral 
argument, reasoning concern-
ing matter of fact) is rational-
ly justified, and hence it is not 
reason [but instead custom or 
habit, a non-rational instinct] 
which engages us to make 
probable inferences 
 
(5) Causal relations cannot be 
known a priori , but can only be 
discovered by experience (of 
constant conjunctions)       
(14) There can be no (good) 
demonstrative argument for UP  
(15) If there is a good argument 
for UP, it must be probable only   
 
 
(3) The sensible qualities of objects do not 
reveal their causes or their effects, and there 
is no known connexion between an object’s 
sensible qualities and its “secret powers”    
 
(9) UP cannot be rationally 
justified by anything that we 
learn through the senses about 
objects’ “secret powers”   
(16) Any probable argument for 
UP would be circular  
(17) There is no good argument 
of any kind for UP   
  
 
(18) The Uniformity Principle 
cannot be rationally justified 
      
 
(10) UP is not intuitively certain   
(11) UP can only be rationally 
justified on the basis of a good 
argument (there must be a 
medium  for proving it)     264 
Figure 1a   The Main Logical Blocks of the Enquiry  Argument (as analysed in Sections 2.2 to 4.1) (1) Only the relation of cause 
and effect can take us beyond the 
evidence of our memory and 
senses 
 
        
 
 
(7) All arguments from 
experience proceed upon the 
supposition that the future will be 
conformable to the past       
 
 
  §2.2  (2) All probable arguments 
(moral arguments, reasonings 
concerning matter of fact) are 
founded on the relation of cause 
and effect    
 
  §2.3  
        
 
 
 
(4) Any effect is quite distinct 
from its cause, and many 
alternative effects are equally 
conceivable   
 
 
(6) All probable arguments 
(moral arguments, reasonings 
concerning matter of fact) are 
founded on experience  
(8) All probable arguments 
(moral arguments, reasonings 
concerning matter of fact) 
proceed upon the supposition that 
nature is uniform, and in 
particular, that similar causes 
will in the future have similar 
effects to those which they have 
had in the past [the Uniformity 
Principle or UP]   
 
      §3.2 
 
(13) The contrary of UP can be 
distinctly conceived, and is 
therefore possible   
 
  
 
(12) All (good) reasonings are 
either demonstrative or moral 
(i.e. probable)  
(19)  CONCLUSION  
No probable argument (moral 
argument, reasoning concern-
ing matter of fact) is rational-
ly justified, and hence it is not 
reason [but instead custom or 
habit, a non-rational instinct] 
which engages us to make 
probable inferences 
 
(5) Causal relations cannot be 
known a priori , but can only be 
discovered by experience (of 
constant conjunctions)       
(14) There can be no (good) 
demonstrative argument for UP  
(15) If there is a good argument 
for UP, it must be probable only   
 
 §4.1  
 
 
(3) The sensible qualities of objects do not 
reveal their causes or their effects, and there 
is no known connexion between an object’s 
sensible qualities and its “secret powers”    
 
(9) UP cannot be rationally 
justified by anything that we 
learn through the senses about 
objects’ “secret powers”   
(16) Any probable argument for 
UP would be circular  
(17) There is no good argument 
of any kind for UP   
 
 
 
(18) The Uniformity Principle 
cannot be rationally justified 
      §3.1   
 
(10) UP is not intuitively certain   
(11) UP can only be rationally 
justified on the basis of a good 
argument (there must be a 
medium  for proving it)      
Hume’s Statement of the Stages of the Enquiry  Argument  265 (1) E26: “By means of [ Cause and Effect ] alone can we go beyond the evidence of our memory and senses.” 
 
(2) E26: “All reasonings concerning matter of fact seem to be founded on the relation of Cause and Effect .” 
 E35: “all arguments concerning existence are founded on the relation of cause and effect” 
 E159: “all our evidence for any matter of fact, which lies beyond the testimony of sense or memory, is 
derived entirely from the relation of cause and effect” 
 
(3) E27: “No object ever discovers, by the qualities which appear to the senses, either the causes which 
produced it, or the effects which will arise from it” 
 E33: “It is allowed on all hands, that there is no known connexion between the sensible qualities and the 
secret powers” 
 
(4) E30: “every effect is a distinct event from its cause.  It could not, therefore, be discovered in the cause, and 
... the conjunction of it with the cause must appear ... arbitrary; since there are always many other effects, which, to reason, must seem fully as consistent and natural.” 
 
(5) E27: “the knowledge of [cause and effect] is not, in any instance, attained by reasonings à priori ; but arises 
entirely from experience” 
 E28: “ causes and effects are discoverable, not by reason, but by experience ” 
 E30: “In vain, therefore, should we pretend to ... infer any cause or effect, without the assistance of 
observation and experience.” 
 
(6) E27: “nor can our reason, unassisted by experience, ever draw any inference concerning real existence and 
matter of fact” 
 E30: “In vain, therefore, should we pretend to determine any single event ... without the assistance of 
observation and experience.” 
 
(7) E33: “we always presume, when we see like sensible qualities, that they have like secret powers, and 
expect, that effects, similar to those which we have experienced, will follow from them” 
 E35: “We have said, that ... all our experimental conclusions proceed upon the supposition, that the future 
will be conformable to the past” 
 E37: “all inferences from experience suppose, as their foundation, that the future will resemble the past, 
and that similar powers will be conjoi ned with similar sensible qualities” 
 
(8) E35: “We have said, that all arguments concerning existence are founded on the relation of cause and 
effect; that our knowledge of that relation is derived entirely from experience; and that all our experimental conclusions proceed upon the supposition, that the future will be conformable to the past.” 
 
(9) E33: “the mind is not led to form such a conclusion concerning [sensible qualities and secret powers’] 
constant and regular conjunction, by any thing which it knows of their nature”   (10) E34: “The connexion between these propos itions [ I have found that such an object has always been 
attended with such an effect  and I foresee, that other objects, which are, in appearance, similar, 
will be attended with similar effects ] is not intuitive.” 
 
(11) E34: “There is required a medium, which may enable the mind to draw such an inference, if indeed it be 
drawn by reasoning and argument.” 
 
(12) E35: “All reasonings may be divided into two kinds, namely demonstrative reasoning, or that concerning 
relations of ideas, and moral reasoning, or that concerning matter of fact and existence.” 
 
(13) E35: “it implies no contradiction, that the course of nature may change ... May I not clearly and 
distinctly conceive [such a thing]?” 
 
(14) E35: “That there are no demonstrative arguments in the case, seems evident” 
 E35: “whatever is intelligible, and can be distinctly conceived, implies no contradiction, and can never 
be proved false by any demonstrative argument or abstract reasoning à priori ” 
 
(15) E35: “If we be, therefore, engaged by arguments to put trust in past experience, and make it the standard 
of our future judgment, these arguments must be probable only, or such as regard matter of fact and real existence” 
 
(16) E35-6: “To endeavour, therefore, the proof [that the future will be conformable to the past] by probable 
arguments, or arguments regarding existence, must be evidently going in a circle, and taking that 
for granted, which is the very point in question.” 
 
(17) E35: “it may be requisite ... to shew, that none of [the branches of human knowledge] can afford such an 
argument” 
 E159: “we have no argument to convince us, that objects, which have, in our experience, been frequently 
conjoined, will likewise, in other instances, be conjoined in the same manner” 
 
(18) E39: “it is not reasoning which engages us to suppose the past resembling the future, and to expect 
similar effects from causes, which are, to appearance, similar” 
 E159: “nothing leads us to [expect constant conjunctions to continue] but custom or a certain instinct of 
our nature” 
 
(19) E32: “I say then, that, even after we have experience of the operations of cause and effect, our 
conclusions from that experience are not founded on reasoning, or any process of the 
understanding.” 
 E43: “All inferences from experience, therefore, are effects of custom, not of reasoning” 
 E46-7: “All belief of matter of fact or real existence [is due merely to] a species of natural instincts, which 
no reasoning or process of the thought and understanding is able, either to produce, or to prevent.”  266 
 267 
 APPENDIX 3: 
A Proof of Chebyshev’s Inequality 
To render this thesis mathematically self-contained, and to satisfy the curiosity of any 
reader who may wish to be assured of the full basis for De Finetti’s (and indeed Bernoulli’s more familiar) law of large numbers, there follows a simple proof of Chebyshev’s Inequality, stated in the form most suitable for the derivation of De Finetti’s law.  The proof of the initial lemma is adapted and expanded from Hogg and Craig (1965) pp. 47-8. 
We start by proving an important lemma, that if 
u(V) is a non-negative function 
of the random variable V with expectation E[ u(V)], then if c is any positive constant, 
(*)   P (u(V) ≥ c)  ≤  E[ ( )]uV c  
We assume that the random variable V is continuous with density function v(x), 
though if V is discrete the proof can easily be adapted by using sums rather than 
integrals. 
Let A be the set of all values x for which u(x) ≥ c.  If A = Ò (that is, if u(x) ≥ c for 
all values of x) then the integral uxvxd x
A()()∫ will give the sum of u(x).v(x) for all 
values of x from –∞ to +∞, which will therefore be equal to E[ u(V)].  If on the other 
hand A ⊂ Ò, then that integral will exclude some values of u(x).v(x), and since such 268 
 values can only be positive or zero, the integral will be either less than or equal to 
E[u(V)].  In either case we have: 
  uxvxd x
A()()∫ ≤   E[u(V)]. 
Now recall that A is the set of all values x for which u(x) ≥ c.  Hence the left-hand 
side of this inequality cannot be increased if we replace u(x) by c.  This gives us: 
  cv x d x
A()∫ ≤   E[u(V)]. 
But since v(x) is the probability density function for the random variable V, we also 
have that 
  vxd x
A()∫ =   P( V ∈ A)   =   P (u(V) ≥ c). 
And by combining these last two results, we reach the desired lemma: 
(*)   P (u(V) ≥ c)  ≤  E[ ( )]uV c  
Moving on, let  X be any random variable with mean μ and variance σ ².  Then the 
Chebyshev Inequality, which we are to prove, states that: 
   for any t > 0,  P (| X – μ  | ≥ t) ≤ σ2
2t 269 
 To prove the Inequality, we first use our lemma ( *) with V substituted by X,  u(V) by 
(X – μ)² and c by t ² (where t is positive): 
   P ((X – μ)² ≥ t²)  ≤  E[( - ) ]2Xtμ2 
We can simplify both sides of this inequality, on the left by taking square roots, and 
on the right by noting that E[( X – μ)²] just is the variance σ ²: 
   P(| X – μ  | ≥ t) ≤ σ2
2t 
which is the Chebyshev Inequality, as desired. 
A common alternative form of the Chebyshev Inequality can be derived from the 
lemma ( *) with V as before substituted by X and u(V) by ( X – μ)², but this time with 
c substituted by k ²σ ² (where k is positive).  This yields the result: 
   P(| X – μ  | ≥ kσ) ≤ 1
2k 
 
 
 270 
 271 
 REFERENCES 
Listed on the following pages are all the works referred to in this thesis, divided 
between those that are cited in Part I (mainly on the interpretation of Hume) and those that are cited in Parts II and III (mainly concerned with technical issues) – the few works that are cited in both parts accordingly appear twice.  Within this framework entries appear in alphabetical order of author and then date order, with the relevant date being in most cases that of first publication (rather than, for example, date of translation).  However in the case of books that have gone through several editions incorporating significant authorial changes, the date of the edition actually referred to is given, followed at the end of the reference by the dates of previous editions.  Where reprints or translations are mentioned, this indicates that any quotations and page references have been taken from these rather than from the original publications.  Following each reference, in brackets, is a list of the pages of the thesis at which that reference is mentioned (if a book is 
never  itself mentioned, this indicates that it has 
been included in the bibliography in virtue of containing articles that are mentioned). 
Since the major publishing houses now operate worldwide and are very well 
known, the place of publication has been omitted from references to books published by them, and the familiar university presses are referred to simply by the name of the university concerned – so “Oxford”, for example, refers to the Oxford University Press (or Clarendon Press). 272 
 (a)  Works Cited in Part I 
Arnold, N. Scott (1983) “Hume’s Skepticism about Inductive Inference”, Journal of the History of Philosophy  21, 
pp. 31-55    (95) 
Ayer, A.J. (1972) Probability and Evidence , Macmillan    (43) 
Baier, Annette C. (1991) A Progress of Sentiments: Reflections on Hume’s Treatise , Harvard    (37n, 95) 
Beauchamp, Tom and Mappes, Thomas (1975) “Is Hume Really a Sceptic about Induction?”, American 
Philosophical Quarterly  12, pp. 119-29    (16n, 95-7) 
Beauchamp, Tom and Rosenberg, Alexander (1981) Hume and the Problem of Causation , Oxford    (16n, 95-7) 
Bennett, Jonathan (1971) Locke, Berkeley, Hume: Central Themes , Oxford    (11n) 
Broughton, Janet (1983) “Hume’s Skepticism about Causal Inferences”, Pacific Philosophical Quarterly  64, pp. 3-
18    (95) 
Craig, Edward (1987) The Mind of God and the Works of Man , Oxford    (26n, 99) 
Flew, Antony (1961) Hume’s Philosophy of Belief , RKP    (4, 7n, 10, 12, 38n, 43) 
Flew, Antony (1979) A Dictionary of Philosophy , Pan    (12n) 
Flew, Antony (1986) David Hume , Blackwell    (12, 38n) 
Fogelin, Robert (1985) Hume’s Skepticism in the Treatise of Human Nature , RKP    (47n) 
Garrett, Don (forthcoming) Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy , Oxford    (xiv, 30-5) 
Gaskin, J.C.A. (1988) Hume’s Philosophy of Religion , Macmillan, 2nd edition    (16n) 
Gemes, Ken (1983) “A Refutation of Inductive Scepticism”, Australasian Journal of Philosophy  61, pp. 434-8    
(75) 
Hall, Roland (1978) 50 years of Hume Scholarship , Edinburgh    (4n) 
Hume, David (1739) A Treatise of Human Nature , ed. L.A. Selby-Bigge, second edition revised by P.H. Nidditch, 
Oxford 1978    (see Treatise  index following) 
Hume, David (1740) Abstract of a book lately published, entituled, A Treatise of Human Nature, etc. , reprinted as 
pp. 641-62 of Hume (1739)    (see Abstract  index following) 273 
 Hume, David (1777) Enquiries concerning Human Understanding and concerning the Principles of Morals , ed. 
L.A. Selby-Bigge, third edition revised by P.H. Nidditch, Oxford 1975 (first publication by Hume 1748 and 
1751 respectively – 1777 was the last edition to incorporate new authorial corrections, and all quotations in the thesis have been corrected to it, as in the text of Appendix 1 above)  (see Enquiries  indexes following) 
Hume, David (1779) Dialogues concerning Natural Religion,  ed. N. Kemp Smith, second edition, Nelson 1947    
(see Dialogues  index following) 
Hume, David (1932) The Letters of David Hume , ed. J.Y.T. Greig, Oxford    (8n) 
Jacobson, Anne Jaap (1987) “The Problem of Induction: what is Hume’s Argument?” Pacific Philosophical 
Quarterly  68, pp. 265-84    (22n, 48n) 
Locke, John (1690) An Essay Concerning Human Understanding , ed. P.H. Nidditch, Oxford 1975    (38-9, 97-9) 
Mackie, J.L. (1974) The Cement of the Universe , Oxford    (4n) 
Mackie, J.L. (1979) “A Defence of Induction”, in G.F. Macdonald ed, Perception and Identity , Cornell, pp. 113-30    
(xi) 
Millican, P.J.R. (1982) “Mackie’s Defence of Induction”, Analysis  42, pp. 19-24    (xi) 
Millican, P.J.R. (1986) “Natural Necessity and Induction”, Philosophy  61, pp. 395-403    (60n) 
Millican, P.J.R. (1995) “Hume’s Argument Concerning Induction: Structure and Interpretation”, in Stanley 
Tweyman ed, David Hume: Critical Assessments , Routledge, volume 2, pp. 91-144    (x-xi) 
Morris, William Edward (1988) “Hume’s Refutation of Inductive Probabilism”, in James H. Fetzer ed, Probability 
and Causality , Reidel, pp. 43-77    (26n) 
Owen, David (1992) “Hume and the Lockean Background: Induction and the Uniformity Principle”, Hume Studies  
18, pp. 179-207    (39n) 
Passmore, J.A. (1952) Hume’s Intentions , Duckworth, third edition 1980    (15) 
Penelhum, Terence (1975) Hume , Macmillan    (4n) 
Stove, D.C. (1965) “Hume, Probability, and Induction”, Philosophical Review  74, pp. 160-77 and reprinted in V.C. 
Chappell ed, Hume (Macmillan, 1968), pp. 187-212    (5, 7n, 15, 16n, 24n, 37, 43, 52n, 73) 
Stove, D.C. (1970) “Deductivism”, Australasian Journal of Philosophy  48, pp. 76-98    (5n) 274 
 Stove, D.C. (1973) Probability and Hume’s Inductive Scepticism , Oxford    (5, 14n, 15, 16, 24-6, 37, 69-74, 75-80, 
83) 
Stove, D.C. (1982) Popper and After: Four Modern Irrationalists , Pergamon    (5n) 
Stove, D.C. (1986) The Rationality of Induction , Oxford    (5n, 75) 
Stroud, Barry (1977) Hume , RKP    (42) 
Winters, Barbara (1979) “Hume on Reason”, Hume Studies  5, pp. 20-35    (87n) 
(b)  Works Cited in Parts II and III 
Achinstein, Peter (1962) “The Circularity of a Self-supporting Inductive Argument”, Analysis  22, pp. 138-41 and 
reprinted in Swinburne (1974) pp. 134-8    (107) 
Achinstein, Peter (1963) “Circularity and Induction”, Analysis  23, pp. 123-7 and reprinted in Swinburne (1974) 
pp. 140-4    (107) 
Ayer, A.J. (1957) “The Conception of Probability as a Logical Relation”, in Körner (1957), pp. 12-17    (145n) 
Ayer, A.J. (1970) “Has Harrod Answered Hume?”, in Induction, Growth and Trade , Oxford, and reprinted with 
some excisions as chapter II of Ayer (1972)    (196-7, 203) 
Ayer, A.J. (1972) Probability and Evidence , Macmillan    (126n) 
Ayer, A.J. (1979) “Replies” (to Mackie on induction), in G.F. Macdonald ed, Perception and Identity , Cornell, 
pp. 298-306    (145n) 
Bacchus, F., Kyburg, H.E. and Thalos, M. (1990) “Against Conditionalization”, Synthese  85, pp. 475-506    (162n) 
Bayes, Thomas (1763) “An Essay Towards Solving a Problem in the Doctrine of Chances”, Philosophical 
Transactions of the Royal Society of London  A53, pp. 370-418 and reprinted in Biometrika  45 (1958) pp. 293-
315    (140) 
Benenson, F.C. (1984) Probability, Objectivity and Evidence , Routledge & Kegan Paul    (126n, 144n) 275 
 Berger, James O. (1985) Statistical Decision Theory and Bayesian Analysis , Springer-Verlag (second edition of 
Statistical Decision Theory: Foundations, Concepts, and Methods , 1980)    (236n) 
Bertrand, J. (1889) Calcul des Probabilités , Gauthier-Villars (Paris)    (214, 216-22) 
Black, Max (1947) Review of Williams (1947), Journal of Symbolic Logic  12, pp. 141-4 
Black, Max (1958) “Self-supporting Inductive Arguments”, Journal of Philosophy  55, pp. 718-25 and reprinted in 
Swinburne (1974) pp. 127-34 
Black, Max (1963) “Self-support and Circularity.  A Reply to Mr Achinstein”, Analysis  23, pp. 43-4 and reprinted 
in Swinburne (1974) pp. 138-9 
Black, Max (1967) “Induction”, in Edwards (1967) volume 4, pp. 169-81 Blackburn, Simon (1973) Reason and Prediction , Cambridge    (144n, 196n, 197-210) 
Box, George E.P. and Tiao, George C. (1973) Bayesian Inference in Statistical Analysis , Addison-Wesley    (231n) 
Braithwaite, R.B. (1957) “On Unknown Probabilities”, in Körner (1957), pp. 3-11    (155n) Broad, C.D. (1928) “The Principles of Problematic Induction”, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society  28, pp. 1-46    
(153n) 
Bronowki, J. (1957) “The Scandal of Philosophy”, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science  8, pp. 329-34    
(195-6) 
Castell, Paul (1996) “Changing Your Mind the Bayesian Way”, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 
Supplementary Volume  70, pp. 79-94    (162n) 
Clark, R.W. (1983) “Induction Justified (But Just Barely)”, Philosophy  58, pp. 481-8    (170) 
Cohen, L. Jonathan (1970) The Implications of Induction , Methuen    (114n, 237n) 
Cohen, L. Jonathan (1977) The Probable and the Provable , Oxford    (237n) 
Cohen, L. Jonathan (1985) “Twelve Questions about Keynes’s Concept of Weight”, British Journal for the 
Philosophy of Science  37, pp. 263-78    (237n) 
Cohen, L. Jonathan (1989) An Introduction to the Philosophy of Induction and Probability , Oxford    (237n) 
Cox, R.T. (1961) The Algebra of Probable Inference , Johns Hopkins    (140) 276 
 De Finetti, Bruno (1937) “La Prévision: ses Lois Logiques, ses Sources Subjectives”, Annales de L’Institut Henri 
Poincaré  7, pp. 1-68 and translated as “Foresight: its Logical Laws, its Subjective Sources” in Kyburg and 
Smokler (1964), pp. 93-158    (155-65) 
De Finetti, Bruno (1969) “Initial Probabilities:  A Prerequisite for any Valid Induction”, Synthese  20, pp. 2-16    
(163) 
De Finetti, Bruno (1970) Teoria Delle Probabilità , Giulio Einaudi (Turin) and translated as Theory of Probability  
volumes 1 (1974) and 2 (1975), Wiley    (160n) 
De Finetti, Bruno (1972) Probability, Induction and Statistics: the Art of Guessing , Wiley 
Dennett, Daniel and Lambert, Karel (1978) eds, The Philosophical Lexicon, 7th edition © Daniel Dennett    (106n) 
Earman, John (1992) Bayes or Bust?:  A Critical Examination of Bayesian Confirmation Theory , MIT    (162n) 
Edwards, Paul (1949) “Russell’s Doubts about Induction”, Mind  68, pp. 141-63 and reprinted in Swinburne 
(1974), pp. 26-47    (107) 
Edwards, Paul (1967) ed, The Encyclopedia of Philosophy , Macmillan 
Edwards, W., Lindman, H. and Savage, L.J. (1963) “Bayesian Statistical Inference for Psychological Research”, 
Psychological Review  70, pp. 193-242 and reprinted in Samuel Kotz and Norman L. Johnson (eds), 
Breakthroughs in Statistics Volume I:  Foundations and Basic Theory , Springer-Verlag, 1992, pp. 531-78    
(124) 
Feigl, Herbert (1950) “De Principiis Non Disputandum ...?”, in Max Black (ed) Philosophical Analysis , Cornell, 
pp. 119-56    (109) 
Fine, Terrence L. (1973) Theories of Probability: an Examination of Foundations , Academic Press    (117n) 
Gillies, D.A. (1973) An Objective Theory of Probability , Methuen    (119n) 
Good, I.J. (1950) Probability and the Weighing of Evidence , Charles Griffin (London)    (162-3, 237n) 
Good, I.J. (1962) “Subjective Probability as the Measure of a Non-Measurable Set”, in E. Nagel, P. Suppes and A. 
Tarski eds, Logic, Methodology and Philosophy of Science , Stanford, pp. 319-29 and reprinted in Good 
(1983) pp. 73-82    (237n) 
Good, I.J. (1967) “On the Principle of Total Evidence”, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science  17, pp. 319-
21 and reprinted in Good (1983) pp. 178-80    (145n) 277 
 Good, I.J. (1969) “Discussion of Bruno De Finetti’s Paper ‘Initial Probabilities:  A Prerequisite for any Valid 
Induction’”, Synthese  20, pp. 17-24    (163-5) 
Good, I.J. (1983) Good Thinking: The Foundations of Probability and Its Applications , Minnesota 
Hacking, Ian (1965) Logic of Statistical Inference , Cambridge    (119n, 130n, 140) 
Hacking, Ian (1966) “Subjective Probability”, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science  16, pp. 334-9    (140, 
159-60) 
Hacking, Ian (1967) “Slightly More Realistic Personal Probability”, Philosophy of Science  34, pp. 311-25    
(161-2, 164) 
Hacking, Ian (1968) “One Problem about Induction”, in Lakatos (1968), pp. 44-59    (112, 140) Harrod, Roy (1951) “Induction and Probability”, Philosophy  26, pp. 37-52    (185) 
Harrod, Roy (1956) Foundations of Inductive Logic , Macmillan    (173, 185-210) 
Harrod, Roy (1959) “New Argument for Induction: Reply to Professor Popper”, British Journal for the Philosophy 
of Science  10, pp. 309-12    (195, 206n) 
Hill, Bruce M. (1988) “De Finetti’s Theorem, Induction and A
(n) or Bayesian Nonparametric Predictive Inference”, 
in J.M. Bernardo, M.H. DeGroot, D.V. Lindley and A.F.M. Smith eds, Bayesian Statistics 3 , Oxford, pp. 211-
241    (160n) 
Hogg, Robert V. and Craig, Allen T. (1965) Introduction to Mathematical Statistics , Macmillan (second edition: 
1958)    (149-50, 267-9) 
Howson, Colin (1995) “Theories of Probability”, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science  46, pp. 1-32    (117, 
122n, 162n, 237n) 
Howson, Colin (1996) “Bayesian Updating”, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society Supplementary Volume  70, 
pp. 63-77    (162n) 
Jaynes E.T. (1968) “Prior Probabilities”, IEEE Transactions on Systems Science and Cybernetics  SSC-4, pp. 227-
41 and reprinted in Jaynes (1983), pp. 116-30 with a brief introduction pp. 114-5    (225) 
Jaynes E.T. (1973) “The Well-Posed Problem”, Foundations of Physic s 3, pp. 477-93 and reprinted in Jaynes 
(1983), pp. 133-48 with a brief introduction pp. 131-2    (216, 220-5) 278 
 Jaynes, E.T. (1983) Papers on Probability, Statistics and Statistical Mechanics , edited by R.D. Rosenkrantz, 
Reidel 
Jeffrey, Richard (1983) The Logic of Decision , University of Chicago (second edition: 1965)    (155n) 
Jeffrey, Richard (1986) “Probabilism and Induction”, Topoi  5, pp. 51-8    (160n) 
Jeffreys, H. (1961) Theory of Probability , Oxford (third edition: 1939, 1948)    (129-39, 140, 143-4, 229) 
Kemeny, J. (1955) “Fair Bets and Inductive Probabilities”, Journal of Symbolic Logic  20, pp. 263-73    (140) 
Keynes, John Maynard (1921) A Treatise on Probability , Macmillan    (144-5, 153, 212-3, 237n) 
Kneale, William (1949a) Probability and Induction , Oxford    (153n) 
Kneale, William (1949b) Review of Williams (1947), Philosophy  24, pp. 86-8    (167) 
Kneebone, G.T. (1951) “Induction and Probability”, Philosophy  26, pp. 261-2    (195) 
Koopman, Bernard O. (1940) “The Bases of Probability”, Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society  46, 
pp. 763-74 and reprinted in Kyburg and Smokler (1964) pp. 161-72    (237n) 
Körner, S. (1957) ed, Observation and Interpretation in the Philosophy of Physics , Dover 
Kyburg, Henry E. Jr (1964) “Recent Work in Inductive Logic”, American Philosophical Quarterly  1, pp. 249-87    
(107, 195-6) 
Kyburg, Henry E. Jr (1974) The Logical Foundations of Statistical Inference , Reidel    (237n) 
Kyburg, Henry E. Jr and Nagel, Ernest (1963) Induction:  Some Current Issues , Wesleyan University Press 
Kyburg, Henry E. Jr and Smokler, Howard E. (1964) eds, Studies in Subjective Probability , Wiley 
Lakatos, Imre (1968) ed, The Problem of Inductive Logic , North-Holland 
Lucas, J.R. (1970) The Concept of Probability , Oxford    (144n) 
Mackie, J.L. (1979) “A Defence of Induction”, in G.F. Macdonald ed, Perception and Identity , Cornell, pp. 113-30    
(176-84, 223-4) 
Mellor D.H. (1971) The Matter of Chance , Cambridge    (119n) 
Millican, P.J.R. (1982) “Mackie’s Defence of Induction”, Analysis  42, pp. 19-24    (184n) 
Millican, P.J.R. (1986) “Natural Necessity and Induction”, Philosophy  61, pp. 395-403    (170) 279 
 Millican, P.J.R. (1995) “Hume’s Argument Concerning Induction: Structure and Interpretation”, in Stanley 
Tweyman ed, David Hume: Critical Assessments , Routledge, volume 2, pp. 91-144    (103) 
Milne, Peter (1983) “A Note on Scale Invariance”, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science  34, pp. 49-55    
(228n) 
Nathan, Amos (1984) “The Fallacy of Intrinsic Distributions”, Philosophy of Science  51, pp. 677-84    (222n) 
Nelson, E.J. (1948) Review of W illiams ( 1947), Philosophy and Phenomenological Research  9, pp. 139-43    
(167-8) 
Popper, Karl R. (1958) “On Mr Roy Harrod’s New Argument for Induction”, British Journal for the Philosophy of 
Science  9, pp. 221-4    (195, 206n) 
Popper, Karl R. (1959) “The Propensity Interpretation of Probability”, British Journal for the Philosophy of 
Science  10, pp. 25-42    (119) 
Ramsey, F.P. (1926) “Truth and Probability”, in The Foundations of Mathematics and other Logical Essays , edited 
by R.B. Braithwaite (Kegan Paul, 1931), pp. 156-98 and reprinted in Kyburg and Smokler (1964) pp. 61-92    
(140) 
Reichenbach, Hans (1949) The Theory of Probability , University of California Press    (110) 
Rosenkrantz, Roger D. (1977) Inference, Method and Decision , Reidel    (222n, 236n) 
Salmon, Wesley C. (1963a) “On Vindicating Induction” in Kyburg and Nagel (1963), pp. 27-41    (112) Salmon, Wesley C. (1963b) “Inductive Inference” in B. Baumrin ed, Philosophy of Science: the Delaware 
Seminar , vol. II, pp. 353-70 and extract reprinted in Swinburne (1974), pp. 85-97    (111-12) 
Salmon, Wesley C. (1966) “The Foundations of Scientific Inference” in R.G. Colodny ed, Mind and Cosmos , 
Pittsburgh, pp. 135-275 and reprinted as The Foundations of Scientific Inference , Pittsburgh, 1967    (126n) 
Salmon, Wesley C. (1968a) “The Justification of Inductive Rules of Inference”, in Lakatos (1968), pp. 24-43    
(112) 
Salmon, Wesley C. (1968b) “Reply” (to discussion, by Hacking (1968) and others, of Salmon 1968a), in Lakatos 
(1968), pp. 74-97    (112) 
Savage, L.J. (1962) “How to Choose the Initial Probabilities - English Summary”, in De Finetti (1972) pp. 143-6    
(140) 280 
 Savage, L.J. (1972) The Foundations of Statistics , Dover (second revised edition: 1954)    (140) 
Seidenfeld, Teddy (1979a) Philosophical Problems of Statistical Inference: Learning from R.A. Fisher , Reidel    
(119n) 
Seidenfeld, Teddy (1979b) “Why I Am Not an Objective Bayesian; Some Reflections Prompted by Rosenkrantz”, 
Theory and Decision  11, pp. 413-440    (236n) 
Skyrms, Brian (1965) “On Failing to Vindicate Induction”, Philosophy of Science  32, pp. 253-68    (112) 
Stove, D.C. (1986) The Rationality of Induction , Oxford    (165-7) 
Strawson, P.F. (1952) Introduction to Logical Theory , Methuen    (107-9, 167) 
Swinburne, Richard (1974) ed, The Justification of Induction , Oxford 
Székely, Gábor J. (1986) Paradoxes in Probability Theory and Mathematical Statistics , Reidel    (222n) 
Urmson, J.O. (1953) “Some Questions Concerning Validity”, Revue Internationale de Philosophie  25, pp. 217-29 
and reprinted in Swinburne (1974), pp. 74-84    (108) 
Van Frassen, Bas C. (1989) Laws and Symmetry , Oxford    (144n, 222n, 228n) 
Von Mises, R. (1957) Probability, Statistics and Truth , Allen and Unwin (second revised English edition: 1928, 
1939, 1951)    (214-6) 
Von Wright, Georg Henrik (1957) The Logical Problem of Induction , Blackwell (second revised edition: 1941)    
(153n) 
Walley, Peter (1991) Statistical Reasoning with Imprecise Probabilities , Chapman and Hall    (236n, 237n) 
Weatherford, Roy (1982) Philosophical Foundations of Probability Theory , Routledge & Kegan Paul    (117) 
Will, Frederick L. (1948) “Donald Williams’ Theory of Induction”, Philosophical Review  57, pp. 231-47    (167) 
Williams, Donald C. (1947) The Ground of Induction , Harvard University Press    (165-9) 
Williams, Donald C. (1953) “On the Direct Probability of Inductions”, Mind  62, pp. 465-83    (167) 
Zabell, S.L. (1985) “Symmetry and Its Discontents”, in B. Skyrms and W.L. Harper eds, Causation, Chance, and 
Credence , Kluwer, pp. 155-90    (160n) 
Zellner, Arnold (1971) An Introduction to Bayesian Inference in Econometrics , Wiley    (236n) 281 
 INDEXES 
Most of the main discussions of other authors within this thesis have been indexed 
above in the bibliography, catalogued under the individual works to which reference is made.  However in some cases an author has been mentioned without any specific work being indicated, and these instances are listed in the following “Index of Names” (which covers all of the thesis except for the Acknowledgements). 
In the case of Hume himself, there are obviously far too many references for 
them all conveniently to be specified in either a bibliography or a simple index of names.  Hence to provide a worthwhile resource for cross-referencing and other such purposes, all discussions of or quotations from specific sections or pages of Hume’s relevant works have been listed in separate indexes, which deal in order with the 
Treatise of Human Nature , the Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding , the 
Abstract of the Treatise , the Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals , and the 
Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion . 282 
 Index of Names (other than to specific works)
Aristotle (and Aristotelianism)    11, 38 
Arnold, N. Scott    7n 
Baier, Annette C.    7n 
Bayes, Thomas (and Bayes’ Theorem, Bayesianism)    
119-28, 129, 138-43, 172-3, 181, 184 
Beauchamp, Tom et alia     x, 7n, 37n 
Berkeley, George  13 
Bernoulli, James    148, 267 
Black, Max    113, 117 
Blackburn, Simon    iv, 104, 173 
Broughton, Janet    7n 
Carnap, Rudolf    xii, 117, 118, 125-6, 145n De Finetti, Bruno    iv, 104, 118, 124, 147, 171, 267 
Dedekind, Richard (Dedekind section)    136 
Descartes, René (and Cartesianism)    93n, 98 
Feyerabend, Paul    5 
Fisher, R.A.    119n, 141 
Flew, Antony    7n 
Fogelin, Robert    7n Good, I.J.    117, 118 
Goodman, Nelson    104, 128, 145n 
Harrod, Roy    iv, 104, 230-1 
Jacobson, Anne Jaap    7n 
Jaynes, E.T.    iv, 118, 126-7, 228-9 Jeffrey, Richard    118 
Jeffreys, H.    iv, 104, 118, 126-7, 141, 164, 236 Kant, Immanuel (and Kantianism)    ix, 105n 
Keynes, John Maynard    118, 126-8, 130n Kuhn, Thomas    5 
Kyburg, Henry E. Jr    117 
Lakatos, Imre    5 
Laplace, Pierre Simon de    118, 135, 147n, 153, 170 
Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm    98-9 
Locke, John    iii, 17, 40 
Mackie, J.L.    iv, 104, 172-3, 185, 211, 213, 226 Nagel, Ernest    117 
Neyman, J.    119 
Pascal, Blaise (and his Wager)    110-11, 115, 118 
Pearson, E.S.    119 
Popper, Karl R.    5 
Ramsey, F.P.    118 
Reichenbach, Hans    112, 114-5, 119 Salmon, Wesley    110, 114-5 
Savage, L.J.    118, 162 
Stove, D.C.    iii, iv, x, 47n, 49n, 113, 141, 147 
Stroud, Barry    7n 
Urmson, J.O.    188 
Venn, John    119 
Von Mises, R.    119, 228 Von Thun, Manfred    77-8 
Von Wright, Georg Henrik    117 
Williams, Donald C.    iv, 104, 147, 171 283 
 Index of References to the Treatise of Human Nature
Section References  
 T I iii 2-14  8 
 T I iii 6  6-10, 64, 257-61 
 T I iii 9-13  91 
 T I iii 11-12  83  T I iii 13  50n 
 T I iii 15  44, 83, 92 
 T I iii 16  63, 86  T I iv 1  83 
 
Page References  
 Txi   84 
 T27   12  T31   84 
 T53   50n 
 T70-1   16n 
 T73-4   22n 
 T80   50n  T86   261 
 T87   25n, 59n, 72n, 261 
 T88-9   72n  T88   58n 
 T89   22, 35, 37, 42, 261 
 T90-1   22n, 34n  T90   34n, 37, 52, 58-9, 261 
 T91   59, 81, 170, 261 
 T92   11n, 32, 261 
 T96n   36, 82, 89 
 T97   32  T103   81 
 T104   36, 57n, 87 
 T111-2  25n  T117n   88, 99 
 T124   17, 39, 54n 
 T128   12 
 T139   82, 96-7 
 T140   89  T142   50 
 T143   11n, 83n, 91  T149   92 
 T160-6  60n 
 T161-2  17  T163-5  58n 
 T173-4  51 
 T175   44, 92 
 T176   86 
 T180   86  T181-3  83 
 T182   86 
 T183   85  T184   89 
 T187-218  93n 
 T187   84 
 T193   86 
 T209   86  T212   86 
 T218   84 
 T224   90  T225   82, 90-1 
 T226-31  93n 
 T265-70  84 
 T265-8  89 
 T265-6  93n  T267-8  93 
 T267   89 
 T371n   88  T414-8  87n 
 T414   17, 87 
 T415-6  86  T437-8  87n 
 T448   92 
 T458   86 
 T459   87 
 T469   11n  T536   87n 
 T546   87n 
 T583   87n  T587   86 
 284 
 Index of References to the 
Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding
Section References  
 E IV   7 ff., 64-7, 257, 263-5 
 E IV i   20 ff., 61-2 
 E IV ii   27 ff., 45 ff.  E V   57 
 E VI   83 
 E IX   63, 86  E X   83, 84 
 E XI   84 
 E XII   94 
 
Page References  
 E25   9, 13, 54n  E25-6   10, 11 
 E26   9, 11n, 16, 20, 22, 57, 67, 99 
 E27   21, 21n, 22, 22n, 23, 67 
 E28   23, 67  E29   22n, 24 
 E30   22, 24, 26, 27, 67 
 E31   16, 17, 27  E32   21, 27, 28, 30, 32, 56, 67, 81 
 E33   29, 46, 61, 67 
 E33n   22n  E34   17, 33, 36, 39n, 46-7, 51n, 67 
 E35   16, 29, 37, 42, 49, 67 
 E35-6   34n, 49, 67, 72n 
 E36   52, 58, 59, 106 
 E36-8   50  E37   33, 36, 37, 39n, 67 
 E37-8   59, 120, 170 
 E38   42  E39   48n, 52, 56, 63, 67  E41   56, 97 
 E42   15  E43   58n, 67 
 E43n   87n 
 E43-5   57 
 E44   57 
 E45   11n  E46-7   57, 67, 85 
 E48   86 
 E54   87  E55   86 
 E56n   17, 39 
 E60-1   16n 
 E72   86 
 E75   11n  E76   15, 86 
 E86-7   44 
 E104   15  E106   86 
 E110   82 
 E111   62  E113   83 
 E138   86 
 E149-50  93n 
 E150   50 
 E151-5  93n  E158   86 
 E159   11n, 67, 82 
 E161   86  E162   32, 82, 92, 94 
 E163   16, 16n, 38, 100 
 E164   74 
 E165   100 
 285 
 Index of References to the 
Abstract of the Treatise
 Non-specific  7, 24n, 26n, 61, 69, 72 
 A646-7  98  A650   16, 25n, 54n 
 A651   7, 16, 72n 
 
 
  
Index of References to the 
Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals
 ME170  12 
 ME239  87n 
 ME285  87 
 
  
 
Index of References to the 
Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion
 Non-specific  ix, 84, 93 
 D134   94  D143   40 
 D145   25n 
 D146   25n 
 D176   40 
 D189   74  D205   50 
 