LOGIC 
The word ‘logic’ as used today is commonly taken to refer to a formal  discipline, as 
indeed it was almost universally from the time of ARISTOTLE until at least the sixteenth 
century. But the writings of Descartes and his followers (notably Malebranche and the authors of the Port Royal Logic
, Arnauld and Nicole) undermined this understanding of 
the word, preparing the ground for LOCKE to reinterpret it most influentially in his Essay 
Concerning Human Understanding . Locke adopted from the Cartesians a contempt for the 
alleged barrenness of Aristotelian syllogistic theory, and aspired to replace it with a 
discipline focused not on the formal relations of words, but instead on the powers of the 
human mind and the improvement of our cognitive faculties. It is this kind of informal discipline, therefore, which is most commonly referred to as “logic” by the empiricist 
authors from Locke to MILL, and indeed their understanding of the logical enterprise 
persisted until the turn of the twentieth century, when FREGE and RUSSELL firmly reestablished the discipline of formal logic in a new, more powerful, and non-Aristotelian 
guise. 
 Locke’s own understanding of Aristotelian logic seems to have been drawn not 
primarily from Aristotle himself or from the medieval schoolmen, but instead from modern 
scholastic authors such as Robert Sanderson and Philippe du Trieu (see Milton 1984). And 
this helps to explain both his low regard for its admittedly second-rate supporters, and also the manner of his criticism. For later scholastic thought had stressed the supposed role of 
formal logic not only in the presentation of argument but also in “invention” or 
“discovery,” and this is the aspect of syllogistic theory of which Locke is most critical: 
The Rules of Syllogism
 serve not to furnish the Mind with those intermediate Ideas , 
that may shew the connexion of remote ones. This way of reasoning discovers no 
new Proofs, but is the Art of marshalling, and ranging the old ones we have already.... A Man knows first, and then he is able to prove syllogistically. So that Syllogism  comes after Knowledge, and then a Man has little or no need of it. (Essay 
Concerning Human Understanding  IV.xvii.6) 
 By contrast Locke does allow some value to syllogism as a means of presenting and 
showing the validity of arguments, and he is careful to express his considerable respect for Aristotle himself, 
whom I look on as one of the greatest Men amongst the Antients ... And who in this 
very invention of Forms of Argumentation ... did great service against those, who were not ashamed to deny any thing. And I readily own, that all right reasoning may 
be reduced to his Forms of Syllogism.” (Essay
 IV.xvii.4) 
But Locke sees syllogisms as far from ideal even for the purpose of presenting arguments, 
and suggests instead (Essay  IV.xvii.4) that reasoning can better be presented as a chain of 
connected ideas with the “middle term” appearing explicitly as such (e.g. “man-animal-
living”) rather than in syllogistic form (e.g. “animals are living; man is an animal; therefore man is living”) in which the premises force the ideas involved into an unnatural sequence 
(“animal-living-man-living”). 
 In place of a syllogistic understanding of reasoning, Locke sees it as founded on “a 
native Faculty to perceive the Coherence, or Incoherence of its Ideas
” (Essay  IV.xvii.4; 
see DEMONSTRATION), a Faculty whose objects, IDEAS, are one and all particular, so 
that the universality which is a fundamental characteristic of formal reasoning becomes merely “accidental” on Locke’s informal conception (Essay
 IV.xvii.8). Hence “logic” 
ceases to be a study of formal patterns of inference, and becomes instead the study of the 
cognitive faculties of the mind, a “facultative logic” (Buickerood 1985) whose aim is to yield principles for the correct employment of those faculties. Since ideas are the material 
with which they work, the study of ideas is at the heart of this discipline, and Locke’s 
Essay
 (together with his posthumous On the Conduct of the Understanding ) thus itself 
appears to be a work of “logic” so conceived, which he also calls the “Doctrine of Signs ” or semiotics--this name being appropriate on the grounds that an idea is “a Sign or 
Representation of the thing [the Understanding] considers” (Essay  I.xxi.4). 
 HUME very explicitly followed the Lockean interpretation of “logic”, and evidently 
saw the first book of his Treatise of Human Nature  as a contribution to it: 
The sole end of  logic is to explain the principles and operations of our reasoning 
faculty, and the nature of our ideas .... This treatise therefore of human nature seems 
intended for a system of the sciences. The author has finished what regards logic ...” (Abstract of a Treatise of Human Nature
:646, quoting A Treatise of Human Nature : 
xv) 
Hume likewise follows Descartes and Locke in viewing the traditional logic as barren, on 
the grounds that any “pretended syllogistical reasoning” which purports to extend our 
knowledge is in reality “nothing but a more imperfect definition” (An Enquiry Concerning 
Human Understanding : 163). 
 Given the scholastic authors with which they were acquainted, it is perhaps not 
surprising that the classical empiricists were so dismissive of formal logic. But after a 
century that has seen a rigorous and fertile discipline rise from the ashes, while the alternative informal search for natural principles of reasoning has little of substance to 
show, one can only conclude that their dismissal of formal logic as a worthwhile subject of 
study was certainly, if understandably, premature. 
 
PRIMARY WORKS Hume, David. A Treatise of Human Nature
 [1739], second edition, edited with an 
analytical index by L. A. Selby-Bigge, revised with notes by P. H. Nidditch. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1978. Hume, David. Abstract of a book lately published, entituled, A Treatise of Human Nature, 
etc. (1740), reprinted as pp. 641-62 of Hume [1739]. 
Hume, David. An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding . In Enquiries concerning 
Human Understanding and concerning the Principles of Morals  [1777], edited with an 
analytical index by L. A. Selby-Bigge, revised with notes by P. H. Nidditch. Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1975; first publication by Hume 1748 and 1751 respectively--1777 was 
the last edition to incorporate new authorial corrections. 
Locke, John. An Essay concerning Human Understanding  [1690], edited with an 
introduction by P. H. Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975. 
BIBLIOGRAPHY Book: 
Howell, Wilbur Samuel. Eighteenth-Century British Logic and Rhetoric
. Princeton NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1971. 
Articles: 
Buickerood, James G. “Locke and the Rise of Facultative Logic.” History and Philosophy 
of Logic  6 (1985): 157-90. 
Milton, J.R. “The Scholastic Background to Locke’s Thought.” Locke Newsletter  15 
(1984): 25-34. 
Passmore, J.A. “Descartes, the British Empiricists, and Formal Logic.” Philosophical 
Review  62 (1953): 545-53. 
Peter Millican 
 