 104 Hume’s Sceptical Doubts concerning Induction  
Peter Millican  
1. Introduction  
Section  IV of Hume‘s first Enquiry , entitled ‗Sceptical Doubts concerning the Operations of the 
Understanding‘, contains the third and most extensive presentation of his massively influential argument 
concerning induction, the foundation stone of his philosophical system.1 However despite being one of the best 
known and most widely read texts in the entire canon of Western philosophy, the interpretation of this 
argument has been muc h debated, and there is still no established consensus even on the question of what 
exactly Hume is attempting to prove with it, let alone on the philosophical merits of his attempt.  
It may seem astonishing that the interpretation of an argument so familia r, and from a writer so clear and 
elegant, can be subject to such debate and apparent uncertainty. Some of this can be put down to the prejudices 
of previous generations of commentators, many of whom dismissed Hume as an extreme ‗deductivist‘ sceptic 
(and hence read his argument as a dogmatic rejection of any reasoning that fails to meet deductive standards), 
while others claimed him as a spiritual father (and hence read his argument anachronistically as an anticipation 
of twentieth -century concerns).2 But a deeper explanation of the extent of the interpretative controversy, even 
among sympathetic and historically sensitive scholars, is provided by the central place that the argument 
occupies within Hume‘s system, and the tensions within that system which it  generates and reflects.3 The most 
fundamental of these tensions is between Hume the inductive sceptic, and Hume the apostle of empirical 
science. For while his famous argument concludes that induction has no basis in reason (commonly interpreted 
as implyi ng that induction is completely unreasonable), nevertheless Hume‘s other writings consistently preach 
the virtues of inductive science, repeatedly emphasizing its superiority over non -empirical ‗divinity and school 
metaphysics‘ ( E 165), and even advocating  explicit inductive criteria of rationality (e.g. T 173–5, E 57–8, 86 –
7, 104 –7, 110 –11, 136 –7). 
With the development of recent Hume scholarship, and much wider appreciation of his constructive 
philosophical purposes, it has become increasingly fashionable to relieve this apparent tension in his 
philosophy by reinterpreting the aims of his argument concerning induction. For although Hume‘s repeated 
statements of his conclusion render it relatively uncontroversial that the overt purpose of his argument is to 
prove that induction ‗is not founded on reason‘, nevertheless this leaves considerable scope for different views 
about what ‗reason‘ means here, and whether it is a notion to which Hume himself is committed. Thus some 
scholars have interpreted Hume‘s ‗reas on‘ to mean reasoning , accordingly taking his conclusion to have 
                                                      
1 The firs t and most studied presentation of the argument is in the Treatise of Human Nature  I. iii. 6, T 86–92, to which frequent 
reference will be made below, and the second in the Abstract  of the Treatise , A 649–52. 
2 Notable examples of the former group are A.  Flew, Hume’s Philosophy of Belief  (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1961), 
D. C. Stove, ‗Hume, Probability, and Induction‘, Philosophical Review , 74 (1965), 160 –77 (repr. in V.  C. Chappell (ed), Hume  
(London: Macmillan, 1968), 187 –212), and D.  C. Stove, Prob ability and Hume’s Inductive Scepticism  (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1973), and of the latter group, A.  J. Ayer, Language, Truth and Logic  (London: Gollancz, 1936) and K.  R. Popper, 
Conjectures and Refutations  (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1963).  
3 The cen trality of the argument within Hume‘s system is evident from the logic and structure of the Enquiry  in particular, but is 
made most explicit in the Abstract , whose title -page declares its purpose as being to illustrate and explain ‗the CHIEF ARGUMENT ‘ 
of the Treatise  (A 641), and which then devotes more space to induction than to any other topic.   105 nothing to do with the rational credentials of inductive inference but rather with its computational mechanism  
or causation  (i.e. that it does not involve, or is not brought about by, reasoni ng or ratiocination).4 Meanwhile 
other scholars have continued to interpret ‗reason‘ as a normative (though usually deductivist or narrowly 
rationalistic) notion, but have treated Hume‘s argument as a critique  of that notion, purely intended to reveal its 
impotence rather than to imply any genuine sceptical concerns about induction.5 Both of these groups of 
scholars, therefore, see Hume‘s argument as being almost totally non -sceptical from his own point of view.  
My aim in this paper is to develop and defend  an interpretation of Hume‘s argument which reconciles its 
apparent sceptical thrust with his positive purposes, while denying neither. So on the one hand, I shall maintain 
(against the recent trend) that Hume‘s ‗Sceptical Doubts‘ are genuinely sceptical , while on the other hand, I 
shall explain (against his traditional critics) why Hume nevertheless feels able to use his argument as the basis 
for a constructive inductive science. My discussion will focus almost entirely on the version of the argument 
which  appears in the Enquiry , partly because it represents Hume‘s considered view and is greatly superior to 
the earlier versions,6 but also because I am more confident of how it is to be interpreted. The argument in the 
Treatise , largely because of its brevity  and structural defects, is open to a far wider range of relatively plausible 
readings. And although my own inclination is to see it as an immature expression of the argument in the 
Enquiry , it is of course conceivable that Hume‘s view changed significantl y between writing the two works. 
Hence I shall here attempt as far as possible to defend my interpretation by reference to the Enquiry  alone, and 
it is fortunate that this gives an ample textual basis for constraining quite tightly the range of plausible 
readings. As we shall see, the detailed logic of Enquiry  IV reveals a very great deal about Hume‘s intentions — 
enough, I believe, to refute both the traditional ‗deductivist‘ and the more recent non -sceptical interpretations. 
The picture of his famous argu ment that eventually emerges is altogether more coherent and defensible than 
his traditional critics have alleged, while at the same time carrying far more sceptical force than his recent 
defenders have acknowledged.  
The remainder of this paper is structur ed as follows. §2 discusses what I describe as the ‗perceptual view 
of Reason‘ (using a capital ‗R‘ to signify the intellectual faculty which Hume, like many others, also calls ‗the 
                                                      
4 For example, D.  Garrett, Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy  (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 
1997), H.  W. Noonan, Hume on Knowledge  (Lon don and New York: Routledge, 1999), and D.  Owen, Hume’s Reason  (Oxford 
and New York: Oxford University Press, 1999). A similar line on the point  of Hume‘s argument is taken by R.  Connon, ‗The 
Naturalism of Hume Revisited‘, in D.  F. Norton, N.  Capaldi, and W. L. Robison (eds.), McGill Hume Studies  (San Diego, Calif.: 
Austin Hill Press, 1979), 121 –45, and by J.  Broughton, ‗Hume‘s Skepticism about Causal Inferences‘, Pacific Philosophical 
Quarterly , 64 (1983), 3 –18 (repr. in D.  W. D. Owen (ed.), Hume: General Philosophy  (Aldershot and Burlington, Vermont: 
Ashgate, 2000), 149 –64), who however interpret ‗reason‘ as a deductivist normative notion rather than as our actual faculty of 
reasoning.  
5 For example T.  Beauchamp and T.  Mappes, ‗Is Hume Really a Sceptic abo ut Induction?‘, American Philosophical Quarterly , 
12 (1975), 119 –29, T.  Beauchamp and A.  Rosenberg, Hume and the Problem of Causation  (Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1981), N.  S. Arnold, ‗Hume‘s Skepticism about Inductive Inference‘, Journal  of the History of Philosophy , 21 
(1983), 31 –55, and A.  C. Baier, A Progress of Sentiments: Reflections on Hume’s Treatise  (Cambridge, Massachusetts and 
London: Harvard University Press, 1991). The papers by Connon and Broughton mentioned in the previous f ootnote also get 
close to this sort of ‗anti -deductivist‘ interpretation of Hume‘s argument in Treatise  I. iii. 6, though Broughton believes that in 
the Enquiry  ‗Hume does treat the analogue of the I. iii. 6 argument as delivering skeptical results‘ (p.15) . 
6 For instance the Treatise  version of the argument is mixed in rather haphazardly with Hume‘s analysis of causation; has a 
highly psychologistic emphasis (on ‗impressions‘, ‗ideas‘, and mental processes instead of on inferential relations between 
propos itions); is structurally convoluted (partly owing to its failure to connect causal with ‗probable‘ reasoning from the outset) ; 
and omits a number of important stages (such as the proof that the Uniformity Principle cannot be founded on sensation or 
intuiti on).  106 understanding‘). This conception of Reason dates back to the birth of phil osophy, but my principal aim here is 
to show that it dominated modern thought in the century prior to Hume, and was taken for granted equally by 
those of both ‗rationalist‘ and ‗empiricist‘ inclinations. Particular attention is given to Locke, whose logica l 
framework was largely inherited by Hume, and whose perceptual view of ‗probable‘ reasoning provides, I 
believe, the principal target of Hume‘s ‗Sceptical Doubts‘. §3 begins the analysis of Section  IV of the Enquiry  
by looking briefly at the distinction k nown as ‗Hume‘s Fork‘, between what he calls ‗relations of ideas‘ and 
‗matters of fact‘. Then §3.1 aims to clarify what exactly Hume understands by the form of inference which he 
calls ‗probable‘, ‗moral‘ or ‗reasoning concerning matter of fact‘, but which  is now usually called ‗induction‘. 
Here I introduce some unambiguous terminology which will be presupposed in the remainder of the paper, 
henceforth using the phrase ‗factual inference to the unobserved‘ to refer to this form of inference, which is the 
topic of Hume‘s famous argument. The argument itself is briefly sketched in §3.2, which most importantly 
introduces what I call the ‗Uniformity Principle‘, the principle of resemblance between past and future which 
plays a central role in Hume‘s discussion. Then §4 to §9.3 work in detail through the text of his argument, 
establishing its logical structure by careful attention to his precise words. I believe that the interpretative 
structure which emerges in §10 (and is presented in detail in the appendix to t he paper) can make sense of 
every paragraph and of every inferential step in Enquiry  IV, something which cannot truly be said, as far as I 
am aware, of any alternative interpretation that has hitherto been proposed.  
While working through Hume‘s argument, I  shall address en  route some major related interpretative 
issues, including his understanding of aprioricity (§4.1) and of ‗demonstrative‘ inference (§7.1), and the 
evidence from Section  IV regarding his alleged causal realism (§9.2). I shall also identify  (§7.2) a major gap in 
his argument, namely, his failure to address the (admittedly highly questionable) possibility that induction 
might be given a rational foundation using mathematical probabilistic reasoning from a  priori principles.  
With all these pre liminaries completed, §10 presents a detailed analysis of the logic of Hume‘s argument, 
starting with his ‗founded on‘ relation (§10.1), then dealing with the role and nature of the Uniformity 
Principle (§10.2), and finally showing (§10.3) how the logic of  his reasoning strongly supports the claim that 
his target is indeed the perceptual view of ‗probable‘ reasoning advocated by Locke. Then §11 sketches 
Hume‘s alternative and totally non -perceptual account of inductive reasoning, explaining how, almost 
paradoxically, his profoundly sceptical argument about inductive inference, by highlighting the central role of 
‗custom‘ in our thinking, is able to provide the basis for his positive theory of inductive science. §12 discusses 
the implications of all this for Hume‘s own understanding of the notion of ‗Reason‘, and stresses its 
revolutionary significance for scientific practice and aspiration. Rationalistic insight is shown to be an 
impossible dream, leaving the modest Humean search for inductive order as our on ly recourse.  
2. Descartes, Locke, and the Ancient Tradition of Perceptual Reason  
People in general, but no doubt philosophers in particular, have long taken pride in their intellectual powers, 
which more than any other feature of humankind seem to elevate us above the beasts (and, perhaps equally 
attractively to some, philosophers above the common herd!). But the spectacular successes of the scientific 
revolution, in which metaphysicians such as Descartes and Leibniz were major participants alongside Galile o, 
Newton, and many other ‗natural philosophers‘, apparently reinforced this hubris even more. The human 
faculty of thinking, which was proving so amazingly effective in unravelling nature‘s secrets, widely came to 
be seen as our pre -eminent and essential characteristic, a view most famously advocated by Descartes: 
‗thought; this alone is inseparable from me. .  . . I am .  . . in the strict sense only a thing that thinks; that is, I am  107 a mind, or intelligence, or intellect, or reason .  . .‘.7 Descartes also influentially distinguished (in his Sixth 
Meditation) between the pure intellectual faculty on the one hand, and on the other hand those faculties, 
notably the senses and the imagination, that contribute to our thinking but are nevertheless contaminated by  the 
body. Only pure intellect was generally supposed capable of yielding true insight and knowledge, and being so 
special and unique to humankind (indeed our whole essence, according to the Cartesians), was piously viewed 
as a manifestation of the divine image.8 
Our intellectual faculty was called by a variety of names, most commonly ‗the understanding‘ or ‗reason‘. 
The former emphasized this faculty‘s function of providing us with insight  — genuine understanding of things 
and perception  of their nature, r ather than mere thought about them. The latter emphasized instead its function 
of providing reasons  — the basis of rational inference and reasoning . These two aspects, though different, are 
closely related, since full understanding of a truth, unless it be  known immediately through direct ‗intuition‘ 
(as, for example, that 1  + 1 = 2), requires the apprehension of one or more inferential steps, and also of the 
reasons which ground them. But whatever their relation, most philosophers of the early modern perio d treated 
the two names as equivalent, and Hume appears to have followed this practice to the extent of alternating 
between ‗reason‘ and ‗the understanding‘, within the same section and sometimes even within the same 
sentence, for the sake of mere elegant variation.9 
Philosophers of course differed in their detailed view of this faculty (which I shall henceforth usually call 
‗Reason‘), but there was general agreement, following ancient tradition, that it was essentially a faculty of 
perception . Descartes fr equently speaks of it as ‗the natural light‘ and of ‗seeing clearly and distinctly‘ by that 
light,10 and perceptual language was standardly used both by his followers (notably Malebranche) and by other 
rationalists. Price provides a British example, writing  within the decade after the first publication of the 
Enquiry : 
 sense and understanding are faculties of the soul totally different .  . . The one not discerning, but suffering; the other 
not suffering, but discerning; and signifying the soul‘s Power of sur veying and examining all things, in order to 
judge of them; which Power, perhaps, can hardly be better defined, than by calling it, in Plato‘s language, the power 
in the soul to which belongs .  . . the apprehension of Truth.11 
                                                      
7 René Descartes, Meditations on First Philosophy  (1641), included with six sets of Objections and Replies  in The Philosophical 
Writings of Descartes , trans. J.  Cottingham, R.  Stoothoff, and D.  Murphy, 3 vols. (Cambridge, New York and Melbourne: 
Cambr idge University Press, 1984), ii. 18.  
8 E. J. Craig, The Mind of God and the Works of Man  (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 1987), chs.  1 and  2, argues that 
the idea of human reason as the ‗image of God‘ within us was even the ‗dominant philosophy‘ of  the entire early modern period, 
and interprets this as Hume‘s principal target.  
9 For examples from the Treatise , see T 88, 92, 150, 180, 186 –7, 193, 211, 218, 268, 413 –17, 463 –4, 468, and compare T 117‡n. 
and 371‡n. For the Enquiry , see E 25, 55, 76, and  104. L.  A. Selby -Bigge, British Moralists , 2 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1897) is perhaps the most widely available source for other writers of the period, amongst whom an identification of ‗reason‘  
and ‗the understanding‘ was evidently commonplace, a s illustrated in his numbered sections §48, §450, and §§590 –4 
(respectively Shaftesbury, An Inquiry concerning Virtue  (1699, 1732), Hutcheson, Illustrations upon the Moral Sense  (1728, 
1742), and Price, A Review of the Principal Questions in Morals  (1758, 1787); in each case the dates are those of the first edition 
and of the edition used by Selby -Bigge).  
10 Hobbes questioned the light metaphor in the Third Set of Objections to the Meditations , with Descartes replying: ‗As everyone 
knows, a ―light in the int ellect‖ means transparent clarity of cognition‘ ( Philosophical Writings , ii. 134–5). Thus his talk of the 
‗natural light‘ and of ‗clear and distinct perception‘ come to much the same thing.  
11 Selby -Bigge, British Moralists  §593.   108 Here the language may be non -Cartesian in flavour, but the meaning is much the same as Descartes‘. Our 
senses, according to Price, do not so much perceive as ‗suffer‘ sensation, while the function of our Reason is to 
‗survey‘, ‗examine‘, ‗discern‘, and thus to ‗apprehend Truth‘.12 
Howev er a perceptual view of Reason was not by any means confined to those we now class as 
‗rationalists‘, for it also dominates the thinking of the ‗empiricist‘ Locke, whose stature in British philosophy 
was unrivalled throughout the period of Hume‘s career.13 Locke‘s Essay concerning Human Understanding  
(hereafter simply the Essay ) does not always follow the usual contemporary practice of treating ‗reason‘ and 
‗the understanding‘ as equivalent, but tends to reserve the former for reasoning  or inference , leaving  direct 
‗intuition‘ of immediately apprehended truths (e.g. that 1  + 1 = 2) as part of ‗the understanding‘ but not of 
‗reason‘ proper.14 This might lead us to expect, in his discussion of the latter sub -faculty, that the standard 
perceptual metaphor would b e relatively muted, but in fact it figures prominently:  
 Inference  . . . consists in nothing but the Perception of the connexion there is between the Ideas , in each step of the 
deduction, whereby the Mind comes to see, either the certain Agreement of Disag reement of any two Ideas , as in 
Demonstration, in which it arrives at Knowledge; or their probable connexion, on which it gives or with -holds its 
Assent, as in Opinion. ( Essay  IV. xvii. 2) 
Locke sees this sub -faculty of reason as yielding two main types of  reasoning, ‗demonstrative‘ and ‗probable‘. 
Both have the same general structure, typically involving one or more intermediate steps between premiss and 
conclusion, with these intermediate steps taking the form of ‗Ideas‘ which may be fully -formed proposit ions 
but apparently need not be.15 To avoid unnecessary complexity, however, I shall assume in what follows that 
                                                      
12 Hume, like Price, was ech oing standard practice when in the Treatise  he stated that ‗Reason is the discovery of truth or 
falsehood‘ ( T 458). But this general agreement on the function of that faculty, and the ‗obvious‘ and equally conventional 
distinction between it and ‗the will‘  (E 14; cf. Hutcheson in Selby -Bigge, British Moralists  §§448, 450) clearly does not imply 
any deep agreement on its nature.  
13 That the perceptual metaphor was flourishing within British non -rationalist thought right up to the time of Hume‘s Treatise  is 
illustrated by Butler‘s Analogy of Religion  (1736), of which Hume thought highly (see E.  C. Mossner, The Life of David Hume , 
2nd edn. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980), 111 –12), and which refers to ‗speculative reason‘ and ‗moral understanding‘ as ‗our 
specula tive [and] practical faculties of perception‘ ( I. vi. 19). 
14 It would be a mistake to read much into this, however, because Locke himself ( Essay  II. xxi. 17–20) forthrightly ridicules the 
language of ‗faculties‘, criticizes it as a source of philosophical error, and declares himself inclined to forgo it completely were it 
not that faculty words are so much in fashion that ‗It looks like too much affectation wholly to lay them by‘ (ed. P.  H. Nidditch 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975), 243).  In his view, when we refer to man‘s ‗understanding‘, all we can properly mean is that 
man has a power to understand, and it is a serious mistake to speak of our faculties ‗as so many distinct Agents‘ (p.  243). 
Accordingly he seems to care little about where faculty boundari es are drawn or how they are named: ‗the understanding, or 
reason, whichever your lordship pleases to call it .  . .‘ (First Letter to Stillingfleet , III. 70). 
15 See para.  6 of Essay  IV. xvii.  4 (p. 673), in which non -propositional ideas such as ‗God the pu nisher‘ and ‗just Punishment‘ 
serve as intermediate steps. Locke is vague about the logical structure of inferences, for example sometimes calling a propos ition 
an ‗Idea‘ but most often treating a proposition as made up of two ‗Ideas‘. Unfortunately with L ocke, as later with Hume, a 
dislike of Aristotelian syllogism seems to have led to a regrettable distaste for logical precision, and his account of reaso ning is 
as a result seriously problematic. For instance it is unclear how his ‗chain of ideas‘ model of  reasoning could deal with 
inferences involving multiple premisses and/or quantified propositions (e.g. ‗All As are Bs or Cs; All Bs are Ds; All Cs are Ds; 
All As are Ds‘ is valid, but not easily reducible to a single chain of ideas; moreover the correspo nding inference with ‗Some 
. . .‘ would be invalid, despite the similarity of the ‗Ideas‘ involved). For a brief contextual overview of Locke‘s ‗logic‘, see  
P. J. R. Millican, ‗Logic‘, in D.  Garrett and E.  Barbanell (eds.), Encyclopaedia of Empiricism  (Wes tport, Conn.: Greenwood 
Press, 1997), 215 –17.  109 the ‗Ideas‘ involved in inferences are indeed propositional, since this is logically more coherent and 
corresponds better with Hume‘s own langua ge in the Enquiry .16 
Locke coins the term ‗proofs‘ for the intermediate ideas that connect the premiss of any inference with its 
conclusion, so the structure of an argument with two such intermediate ideas would be as follows:  
  Premiss → Proof 1 → Proof 2 → Conclusion  
Whether this counts as a piece of ‗demonstrative‘ reasoning or ‗probable‘ reasoning will depend entirely on the 
strength of the inferential connexions, the ‗links in the chain of ideas‘ that are here shown as arrows . If these 
links are all ‗intuitive‘ — providing an immediate, transparently clear, and visibly certain connexion — then 
the inference as a whole is demonstrative, meaning that the conclusion follows from the premiss with absolute 
certainty. If, on the oth er hand, the links (or, presumably, any subset of them) are merely ‗probable‘, then the 
inference itself is only probable.17 
It is worth re -emphasizing two key points about Locke‘s account of inference. The first of these, which 
will prove relevant to clari fying the force of Hume‘s famous argument, is that Locke‘s distinction between 
‗demonstrative‘ and ‗probable‘ reasoning has nothing to do with formal structure, but depends entirely on the 
strength of the relevant inferential connexions:  
 As Demonstration is the shewing the Agreement, or Disagreement of two Ideas , by the intervention of one or more 
Proofs, which have a constant, immutable, and visible connexion one with another: so Probability  is nothing but the 
appearance of such an Agreement, or Disagreem ent, by the intervention of Proofs, whose connexion is not constant 
and immutable, or at least is not perceived to be so, but is, or appears for the most part to be so, and is enough to 
induce the Mind to judge  the Proposition to be true, or false, rather than the contrary. ( Essay  IV. xv. 1) 
The second key point, confirming Locke‘s place within the ancient tradition which clearly dominated early 
modern philosophy (and much else before and since), is that in all of its operations, and hence in Lockean 
probab le reasoning as well as demonstrative, Reason‘s primary function is one of perception :18 
 In both [demonstrative and probable reasoning] the Faculty which finds out the Means, and rightly applies them to 
discover Certainty in the one, and Probability in the  other, is that which we call Reason. For as Reason perceives the 
                                                      
16 Although Hume still sometimes lapses into Lockean talk of ‗interposing ideas‘ ( E 37), the core of his argument in Section  IV 
of the Enquiry  is expressed in the (logically far preferable) language of ‗proposit ions‘ (e.g. E 34). Hence I disagree with Owen‘s 
claim ( Hume’s Reason , 119 –20) that the Lockean ‗chain of ideas‘ model of inference is essential for properly understanding 
Hume‘s argument.  
17 However it does not follow that the conclusion of a ‗probable‘ inf erence is itself  probable (i.e. likely to be true), even if the 
premiss is true, for each merely probable connexion in a long chain will gradually erode the probability of the whole, and th ere 
may besides be other probable inferences that weigh on the othe r side. Locke is aware that judging the overall probability of a 
proposition will typically require the balancing of opposing considerations, as he makes clear in a passage ( Essay  IV. xv. 5) 
which interestingly anticipates Hume‘s argument against the credi bility of miracle reports in Enquiry  X. 
18 This point is made in terms of Reason rather than the more narrowly inferential ‗reason proper‘, to emphasize Locke‘s place i n 
the tradition. But it will be no surprise that Reason‘s main non -inferential operation,  that of intuition, is explained by Locke in 
totally perceptual terms: ‗This part of Knowledge is irresistible, and like the bright Sun -shine, forces it self immediately to be 
perceived, as soon as ever the Mind turns its view that way; and leaves no room for Hesitation, Doubt, or Examination, but the 
Mind is presently filled with the clear Light of it.‘ ( IV. ii. 1). It is interesting to note that, whether consciously or unconsciously, 
Hume would later use strikingly similar language to characterize the irr esistibility of inductive ‗proofs‘ (e.g.  his reference to 
sunshine at T 183, and the phrase ‗no room for doubt‘ at E 56‡n.), despite his total rejection of the perceptual model of inductive 
reasoning.   110 necessary, and indubitable connexion of all the Ideas  or Proofs one to another, in each step of any Demonstration 
that produces Knowledge; so it likewise perceives the probable connexion of all the Ideas  or Proofs one to another, 
in every step of a Discourse, to which it will think Assent due. .  . . [Where] the Mind does not perceive this probable 
connexion; where it does not discern, whether there be any such connexion, or no, there Men‘s Op inions are not the 
product of Judgment, or the Consequence of Reason; but the effects of Chance and Hazard .  . . (Essay  IV. xvii. 2) 
As his language of ‗perception‘ and ‗discovery‘ imply, Locke considers probability to be a thoroughly 
objective matter: dep ending on the evidence that we have for it, ‗so is any Proposition in it self, more or less 
probable‘ ( Essay  IV. xv. 6; cf.  IV. xx. 5). Accordingly, forming a ‗right Judgment‘ about such propositions is 
‗to proportion the Assent  to the different Evidence a nd Probability of the thing‘ ( Essay  IV. xvi. 9) and where 
there is mixed evidence for and against the proposition in question, to ‗take a true estimate of the force and 
weight of each Probability; and then casting them up all right together, chuse that sid e, which has the 
over-balance‘ ( IV. xvii. 16). 
The extent to which Locke‘s thinking is infused with the perceptual view of Reason is illustrated by how 
he takes pains to address, and then deals with, a problem which arises precisely because he holds that v iew: if 
probable reasoning involves the perception  of probabilities, then how is it that people ever disagree regarding 
what is, and is not, probable? Locke devotes an entire chapter (nearly four times the length of the earlier one on 
probability!) to this  artificial problem of ‗Wrong Assent, or Errour‘, just as Descartes had devoted his entire 
Fourth Meditation, and their solutions to it have significant similarities.19 Neither takes seriously the possibility 
of falsehood or illusion in the basic perceptual  deliverances of Reason, and both instead attribute error mainly 
to ill-informed, dogmatic, or precipitate judgement. Even though Locke, unlike Descartes at this point, 
explicitly recognizes that some people have a weaker intellectual faculty than others, this turns out not to be 
due to any failure to perceive correctly the appropriate component probabilities, but rather, an inability to 
‗carry a train of Consequences in their Heads, nor weigh exactly the preponderancy of contrary Proofs and 
Testimonies, ma king every circumstance its due allowance‘ ( Essay  IV. xx. 5). It is in memory, attentiveness, 
concentration, and thoroughness that weak reasoners fall short, rather than in the rational perception of 
individual probabilities.  
Locke‘s treatment of error mig ht well seem to be straining the perceptual view of Reason potentially to 
breaking -point. In deductive disciplines such as mathematics and logic, and even calculable games such as 
chess, talk of ‗seeing‘ truths and inferential connexions may indeed come na turally, almost irresistibly.20 But 
the same is not true in non -deductive areas, where truth and evidential relationships are less clear -cut and often 
controversial, so that visual metaphors seem far less appropriate — here the language of ‗opinion‘ and 
                                                      
19 Though they importantly disagree on a related matter,  namely the ethics of belief. Descartes maintains that we are free to 
withhold assent to any judgement except when we have clear and distinct perception of its truth (e.g. Philosophical Writings , 
ii. 25, 41), whereas Locke, like Hume after him, acknowledge s that belief is involuntary even in many cases of merely probable 
evidence: ‗we cannot hinder .  . . our Assent, where the Probability manifestly appears upon due Consideration of all the 
Measures of it .  . . a Man can no more avoid a ssenting, or taking it  to be true, where he perceives the greater Probability‘ 
(IV. xx. 16) — note yet again the perceptual metaphor.  
20 In an early draft of the Essay , Locke even went so far as to identify demonstration with intuition on the basis of its visual 
nature: ‗we .  . . looke for noe greater certainty then what our eyes can afford us, the whole evidence of this assureance being noe 
more then what the word Demonstration  doth naturaly import; which is to shew any thing as it is & make it be perceived soe that 
in truth wha t we come to know this way is not by proofe but intuition, all the proofe that is used in this way of knowledg being 
noe thing else but shewing men how they shall see right .  . . without useing arguments to perswade them that they are soe‘ (John 
Locke, Draft B of the Essay Concerning Human Understanding , in Drafts for the Essay Concerning Human Understanding, and 
Other Philosophical Writings , ed. P.  H. Nidditch and G.  A. J. Rogers (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990), i.  153).   111 ‗estimation‘ is likely to be preferred, with disagreements being ascribed to differences in personal judgement 
rather than ‗error‘. It is interesting to speculate whether this might in part explain the reluctance of earlier 
philosophers, held captive by the p erceptual ideal, to accommodate probability within their theories. Descartes, 
for example, attempts rather unconvincingly to force the scientific practice with which he is familiar into a 
broadly deductive pattern, rejecting the notion of ‗mere‘ probabilit y and instead characterizing differences 
between acceptable levels of theory confirmation only in terms of varying degrees of ‗certainty‘ (so that a 
theory which is actually at best highly probable might be described by him as ‗morally certain‘).21 It is ha rd to 
say whether this reluctance to recognize the notion of probability was indeed significantly conditioned by the 
perceptual metaphor. But if it was, then some of the differences between the ‗rationalist‘ Descartes and the 
‗empiricist‘ Locke may be less  to do with a contrast in ‗rationalistic‘ outlook than with their relative 
willingness to acknowledge the messy truth about scientific and everyday inferential practice at the price of 
accepting tensions within their theory of Reason. Locke, at any rate, w as prepared to pay that price, and it was 
his explicit recognition of probable reasoning, and his incorporation of it within the domain of perceptual 
Reason, that set the scene for Hume‘s sceptical attack.22 
3. The Topic and Overall Structure of Hume’s Argu ment  
Hume begins Section  IV of the Enquiry  by distinguishing between two kinds of proposition, which he calls 
‗relations of ideas‘ and ‗matters of fact‘. The former comprise ‗the sciences of Geometry, Algebra, and 
Arithmetic; and in short, every affirmatio n, which is either intuitively or demonstratively certain‘. These are 
discoverable ‗by the mere operation of thought‘, without consulting experience, because as the classification 
implies, they concern only the internal relations between our ideas themselv es, and therefore have no 
‗dependence on what is any where existent in the universe‘ ( E 25). Knowledge of relations of ideas thus fits 
comfortably within the perceptual model of Reason, and Hume accordingly here sees no need to dispute or 
modify the conven tional Lockean picture. Indeed he is essentially in broad agreement with Locke to this point: 
knowledge of relations of ideas is to be had either directly through immediate intuition, or indirectly through 
demonstrative reasoning, which itself consists of chains of intuitive links.  
3.1 Hume’s Quarry: The Basis of Factual Inference to the Unobserved  
It is the basis of our assurance of ‗matters of fact‘ which Hume wishes to explore further, since this is of a 
fundamentally different character and far less tra nsparent than our knowledge of ‗relations of ideas‘:  
 Matters of fact .  . . are not ascertained in the same manner; nor is our evidence of their truth, however great, of a like 
nature with the foregoing. The contrary of every matter of fact is still possib le; because it can never imply a 
contradiction, and is conceived by the mind with the same facility and distinctness, as if ever so conformable to 
reality. That the sun will not rise to -morrow  is no less intelligible a proposition, and implies no more cont radiction, 
than the affirmation, that it will rise . We should in vain, therefore, attempt to demonstrate its falsehood. Were it 
demonstratively false, it would imply a contradiction, and could never be distinctly conceived by the mind.  
                                                      
21 See D.  M. Clarke, Descartes’ Phil osophy of Science  (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1982), 134 –59, especially 
137–8 and 158 –9, for a useful account of Descartes‘ treatment of theory confirmation and the relative certainty of theories, and 
references to his negative comments on pr obability.  
22 It is perhaps significant that Hume‘s two most extensive discussions of inductive inference in the Enquiry  (Sections  IV and X) 
deal respectively with what Locke states to be the two ‗grounds of Probability‘, namely, ‗conformity with our own Ex perience‘ 
and ‗the Testimony of others Experience‘ ( Essay  IV. xv. 4, section heading). Locke‘s discussion of these two ‗grounds‘ is 
extremely cursory, and he never spells out how they are supposed to condition the perception of probable connexions.   112   It may, therefore,  be a subject worthy of curiosity, to enquire what is the nature of that evidence, which assures 
us of any real existence and matter of fact, beyond the present testimony of our senses, or the records of our memory. 
(E 25–6) 
So the aim of Hume‘s investigat ion in the remainder of Section  IV will be to examine the foundation of our 
beliefs about matters of fact which are absent : those that are not immediately ‗present‘ to our senses or 
memory.23 Hume will argue that the only possible foundation for such belief s is provided by extrapolative 
inferences from things that we have observed to those that we have not, these inferences operating on the 
assumption that the unobserved will resemble the observed.24 In the Treatise  and Abstract  Hume usually 
follows Locke in calling these ‗probable‘ reasonings or arguments, whereas in the Enquiry  he tends to prefer 
the expression ‗reasonings concerning matter of fact‘ (though he still uses the term ‗probable‘, and sometimes 
‗moral‘). However since they are now generally termed  ‗inductive‘ infe rences, Hume‘s argument is most 
commonly referred to as his argument concerning induction . 
Unfortunately the terms ‗probable‘, ‗moral‘, ‗inductive‘, and even ‗reasoning concerning matter of fact‘ 
all carry some risk of misunderstanding, so  it is important to keep in mind that Hume is here discussing 
everyday factual inferences, of the kind that we use whenever we draw a conclusion about any empirical state 
of affairs which is neither directly observed nor remembered. Scientific inferences f all into the same category, 
because although these may be distinguished by the care and precision that are exercised in making them (their 
‗exacter and more scrupulous method of proceeding‘; D 134), nevertheless Hume maintains that they are 
essentially ‗no thing but the reflections of common life, methodized and corrected‘ ( E 162). So taken as a class, 
the inferences that Hume is concerned with are not in any way unusual: they are neither particularly technical, 
nor involve any distinctive subject -matter, no r have any specific grammatical form. When he calls them 
‗probable‘, he is using this term in its Lockean sense of being less than certain, which does not imply that they 
need be probabilistic  in any mathematical sense. When he calls them ‗moral‘, he is us ing this term in the 
eighteenth -century sense in which ‗moral evidence‘ means ‗evidence which is merely probable and not 
demonstrative‘ ( Oxford English Dictionary ), and this does not imply that they need have anything to do with 
morality  or ethics  or even with the ‗moral sciences‘ (such as economics, politics, etc.). And when we today call 
these inferences ‗inductive‘, all we should mean is that they involve extrapolation from what has been 
experienced to something which has not been experienced, not that t hey need be ‗inductive‘ in the Aristotelian 
sense of involving an inference to universal  laws.25 
                                                      
23 Hume sometimes speaks simply of ‗matters of fact‘, but he is clearly not concerned here with those that are immediately 
available to us through sensation or memory, since he raises no sceptical doubts about these faculties at this point. It has been 
suggested ( by J.  Bennett, Locke, Berkeley, Hume: Central Themes  (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971), 245) that Hume tends to 
count something as a ‗matter of fact‘ only if it is ‗absent‘. But this seems too strong a conclusion to draw from Hume‘s 
admittedly sometimes care less omission of the restriction (e.g. T 92, E 75), given that such a usage would make its common 
inclusion (e.g. E 26, 45, 159) pleonastic; would not conform to his principal criterion for ‗matter of factness‘ (conceivability of 
the contrary); and would c onflict outright with some of his explicit uses of the phrase (e.g. T 143: ‗any matter of fact we 
remember‘; T 469: ‗Here is a matter of fact; but ‘tis the object of feeling, not of reason.‘).  
24 However not all factual beliefs have any such foundation, not ably those based on indoctrination or ‗education‘ (T116 –7). 
25 Some Hume interpreters have apparently been misled by the Aristotelian sense of ‗induction‘, which is ironic given that Hume 
himself never uses the term in this context. Flew, for example, clear ly takes the Aristotelian sense as primary, defining induction 
as ‗A  method of reasoning by which a ge neral law or principle is inferred from observed particular instances‘ (A. Flew, A 
Dictionary of Philosophy  (London: Pan, 1979), 159); and in his Hume’s P hilosophy of Belief , 71–2, and David Hume  (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1986), 53, he interprets Hume‘s argument as applying only to ‗inductive‘ arguments thus understood.   113 The potential misunderstanding that arises from Hume‘s use of the term ‗reasoning concerning matter of 
fact‘ (sometimes ‗matter of fact and existence‘) is best explained by example. Consider any deductively valid 
inference that has an experiential conclusion, such as the following:26 
  Mars is red and round    therefore     Some round thing is coloured  
Does this count as ‗reasoning concerning matter of fact‘? It mi ght at first glance seem to do so, for it is surely a 
piece of reasoning, while both its premiss and its conclusion assert straightforward ‗matters of fact‘ 
(i.e. contingent propositions knowable only through experience). But such an inference cannot possi bly count 
as ‗reasoning concerning matter of fact‘ as Hume  understands that phrase, because here the link between 
premiss and conclusion is deductively certain rather than merely ‗probable‘, is clearly explicable in terms of 
‗relations of ideas‘, and hence  (a point whose significance will become clear later) requires no appeal to 
experience and no dependence on supposed causal relations. In Hume‘s terms, therefore, this inference is 
certainly not an instance of ‗reasoning concerning matter of fact‘, and hen ce falls outside the scope of his main 
discussion.  
To sum up, Hume‘s interest in Enquiry  IV is in the type of inference whereby we acquire belief in matters 
of fact ‗ beyond  what is immediately present to the memory and senses‘ ( E 45, my emphasis), and beyo nd what 
can inferred from that basis by purely deductive methods (i.e.  ‗demonstrative‘ reasoning; see §7.1 below). In 
other words, he is concerned with ampliative  reasoning, whereby we draw conclusions about new matters of 
fact which are not deductively im plied by those from which we start. Following Locke, Hume recognizes that 
such reasoning will generally yield merely ‗probable‘ conclusions, and at best ‗moral‘ certainty, so he 
accordingly calls it ‗probable‘ or ‗moral‘ reasoning. As we shall see, he take s all such reasoning to be based on 
an extrapolation from observed to unobserved, presupposing a resemblance between the two — extrapolative 
inference of this sort is now almost universally called induction . To clarify the presentation of Hume‘s 
argument, and my discussion of it, some simple and unambiguous terminology will prove helpful:  
 
Factual Inference  Inference that draws a conclusion about matter(s) of fact, beyond what 
is deductively (‗demonstratively‘) implied by the premisses (whatever 
those facts  might be, and however that inference might operate).  
Factual Inference to the Unobserved  Factual inference  that moves from premisses about what has been 
observed, to a conclusion about something which has not been observed 
(however that inference might o perate).  
Inductive Inference  Factual inference to the unobserved  that operates by extrapolation on 
the basis that the unobserved will resemble the observed.  
 
3.2 A Preliminary Sketch of Hume’s Argument, and his Uniformity Principle  
The argument of Enquir y IV aims to prove that factual inference to the unobserved is not ‗founded on‘ the 
faculty of Reason (what exactly Hume means by all this will be the topic of §10 below). This proof falls 
                                                      
26 Note that here and elsewhere I use the term ‗deductive‘ in its informal  sense, according to which an inference is deductively 
valid if and only if the truth of its premisses logically guarantees the truth of its conclusion (I shall argue in §7.1 below  that this 
is essentially what Hume means by ‗demonstrative‘). There is no requirement that the i nference should be ‗valid in virtue of its 
form‘, nor that it should be reducible through substitution to a formal tautology. Hence my choice of this example, whose 
validity derives in part from the meanings of ‗red‘ and ‗coloured‘ rather than from any for mal inference schema.   114 broadly into two halves, pivoting around a principle of resemblance  between observed and unobserved which I 
shall call the Uniformity Principle. In the first half Hume begins by arguing that all factual inference to the 
unobserved must be founded on experience, since only experience can tell us anything about causal relat ions, 
and causation provides our only basis for drawing inferences about things that we have not perceived. He then 
goes on to conclude that since all inference from experience is founded on the supposition that what we find in 
experience can be extrapolat ed beyond it (i.e. the Uniformity Principle), it follows that all factual inference to 
the unobserved must itself be founded on that Uniformity Principle. Hume expresses our reliance on this 
principle in a number of ways, sometimes in general terms but som etimes more specifically in terms of the 
expected uniformity of cause and effect relations:  
 we always presume, when we see like sensible qualities, that they have like secret powers, and expect, that effects, 
similar to those which we have experienced, wi ll follow from them. ( E 33) 
 . . . we .  . . put trust in past experience, and make it the standard of our future judgment .  . . (E 35) 
 . . . all our experimental conclusions proceed upon the supposition, that the future will be conformable to the past. 
(E 35) 
 . . . all inferences from experience suppose, as their foundation, that the future will resemble the past, and that similar 
powers will be conjoined with similar sensible qualities. ( E 37) 
The second half of Hume‘s argument is devoted to showing that  this Uniformity Principle has no adequate 
foundation in Reason, since it cannot be established a  priori from anything that we discover through immediate 
sensation; it does not follow immediately (i.e. by ‗intuition‘) from the uniformity that we have obser ved within 
our experience; and nor can it be proved from that experience either demonstratively or by factual reasoning. 
Having exhausted, as he believes, all possible sources of rational foundation, Hume eventually concludes that 
the Uniformity Principle cannot be founded on Reason. And given the result from the first half of his 
argument, that all factual inference to the unobserved is founded on the Uniformity Principle, he therefore 
takes it to follow that no factual inference to the unobserved is found ed on Reason.  
Let us now explore the stages of this argument in detail, working in turn through the main propositions 
that Hume is concerned to establish (and which provide the main headings for §§4 to 8 below).  
4. All Factual Inferences to the Unobserved are Founded on Experience  
Part i of Section  IV of the Enquiry  is devoted to establishing one fundamental result, that all factual inferences 
to the unobserved must, if they are to have any force, be based on e xperience. So part of the answer to Hume‘s 
original query: ‗what is the nature of that evidence, which assures us of any [absent] matter of fact‘ ( E 26) is 
that such evidence cannot be purely a priori.  
4.1 What does Hume Mean by ‘A Priori’?  
Before examining Hume‘s argument for this important result, ho wever, it will be helpful to clarify what he 
understands by aprioricity. For when he denies that some kind of knowledge or inference is a  priori, he usually 
means not simply that it requires experience , but that it requires experience beyond mere perceptio n of the 
objects concerned . The contrast between the more familiar ‗absolute‘ notion of aprioricity and this Humean 
notion is brought out by a passage in his Dialogues concerning Natural Religion  (henceforth the Dialogues ) 
which nicely summarizes the Secti on IV Part i argument that we are shortly to examine:   115  Were a man to abstract from every thing which he knows or has seen, he would be altogether incapable, merely from 
his own ideas, to determine what kind of scene the universe must be, or to give the pre ference to one state or 
situation of things above another. For as nothing, which he clearly conceives, could be esteemed impossible or 
implying a contradiction, every chimera of his fancy would be upon an equal footing; nor could he assign any just 
reason,  why he adheres to one idea or system, and rejects the others, which are equally possible.  
  Again; after he opens his eyes, and contemplates the world, as it really is, it would be impossible for him, at 
first, to assign the cause of any one event; much l ess, of the whole of things or of the universe. He might set his 
fancy a rambling; and she might bring him in an infinite variety of reports and representations. These would all be 
possible; but being all equally possible, he would never, of himself, give a satisfactory account for his preferring one 
of them to the rest. Experience alone can point out to him the true cause of any phenomenon. ( D 145–6) 
In this passage the first paragraph illustrates the absolute notion of aprioricity, according to which a pr oposition 
counts as a  priori only if someone could know it while ‗abstracting from every thing which he knows or has 
seen‘ — that is, without appeal to any experience whatever . The second paragraph illustrates the more relaxed 
Humean notion, according to w hich a proposition counts as a  priori if it can be known without appeal to any 
experience beyond what is currently being perceived  (and hence without any appeal to memory as opposed to 
sensation).  
It would take us too far afield to discuss the broader logi cal issues and difficulties associated with this 
Humean notion of aprioricity, but it is worth considering why Hume adopts it. In the context of his discussion 
of factual inference to the unobserved  he is obviously prepared to take for granted what is observed (i.e. the 
immediate deliverances of our senses).27 His question at this point in his discussion is what else can be inferred 
from our sensory perceptions, and his answer is that if we exclude all experience other than those perceptions 
themselves (and therefore exclude for the present even the evidence of memory), then no further ‘object’ 
whatever  can be inferred: ‗There is no object, which implies the existence of any other if we consider these 
objects in themselves, and never look beyond the ideas whi ch we form of them‘ ( T 86–7). Hume treats present 
perceptual ‗ideas‘ as a  priori in order to express this point, but his doing so also seems to be part of a broader 
tendency to incorporate such ideas within the domain of Reason, presumably again because of  their 
epistemological immediacy and security. At one point in the Abstract  he even appears to suggest that Reason 
itself is capable of sensory perception: ‗It is not any thing that reason sees in the cause , which make us infer 
the effect. Such an inferenc e, were it possible, would amount to a demonstration, as being founded merely on 
the comparison of ideas.‘ ( A 650, my emphasis). The Enquiry  is less explicit, but comes close to the same 
suggestion: ‗When we reason à  priori, and consider merely any object or cause, as it appears to the mind , 
independent of all observation, it never could suggest to us the notion of any distinct object, such as its effect‘ 
(E 31, my emphasis). Here again we have the usual contrast between, on the one hand, what is immediatel y 
perceived and is thus available a  priori to ‗the mind‘, and on the other hand, what has been previously  
perceived (and is now merely remembered) and is thus counted as a  posteriori ‗experience‘ or ‗observation‘.  
There are many other echoes, throughout th is section of the Enquiry , of the perceptual view of Reason, 
and indeed the entire argument of Part  i can be understood as the start of a systematic assault on that view. 
This, I would suggest, explains why Hume expounds at such length what is logically a relatively small part of 
his overall argument, providing numerous examples to illustrate his central thesis that the causal powers of 
                                                      
27 This does not mean, however, that he is prepared to take for granted our interpretation  of our sensory impressions. For 
example, when we have an experience like that of seeing, smelling, handling, and tasting bread, it is only the i mmediate 
impressions that carry the sanction of sensation. Whether those impressions are genuinely caused by a nourishing food is anot her 
matter entirely, and one that can perfectly well be subject to sceptical doubt ( E 33–4, 37). Thus the immediate delive rances of 
our senses include our perception of breadlike ‗sensible [i.e. sensory] qualities‘, but not that we are genuinely perceiving bread .  116 objects are not ‗perceivable‘ in any way. As he repeatedly emphasizes, all that we perceive of objects comes 
through the s enses, and Reason is quite unable to discover, within the ‗sensible qualities‘ of objects or the ideas 
that they produce in us, anything that carries any direct implication regarding those objects‘ future behaviour.  
4.2 The Argument of Section IV Part i  
The structure of Hume‘s argument in Part  i of Section  IV can be represented as follows, with each major stage 
represented by a numbered proposition, and the set of arrows to any particular propos ition indicating Hume‘s 
grounds for inferring that proposition (whether or not those grounds are, in fact, adequate — the aim here is to 
show the structure of Hume‘s reasoning, not necessarily to endorse it).  
 
This diagram provides, of course, no more than an idealized outline, since Hume himself does not present his  
arguments as having any such explicit structure. Indeed it is not easy in Part  i to find even a straigh tforward 
statement of its conclusion, though proposition (6) is evidently implicit both in Hume‘s arg umentative 
procedure and in the summing -up which he  gives in the first paragraph of Part  ii (E 32).28 Moreover his 
oft-repeated explicit statements of (2) and (5) are clearly intended to be read together, and Hume apparently 
sees (6) as such an obvious consequence of these that it does not even need to be s tated, except perhaps in 
passing: ‗nor can our reason, unassisted by experience, ever draw any inference concerning real existence and 
matter of fact‘ ( E 27); ‗In vain, therefore, should we pretend to determine any single event .  . . without the 
assistance  of observ ation and experience.‘ ( E 30). 
Hume‘s argument from (1) to (2) is presented very briefly at E 26: ‗All reasonings concerning matter of 
fact seem to be founded on the relation of Cause and Effect . By means of that relation alone we can go beyond 
the evidence of our memory and senses.‘ He then proceeds to give some illustrations to substantiate this claim 
                                                      
28 For the summing up, see the beginning of §5 below. Hume‘s procedure of arguing for (6) via (2) and (5) is also m ade clear at 
E 27: ‗If we would satisfy ourselves, therefore, concerning the nature of that evidence, which assures us of matters of fact, w e 
must enquire how we arrive at the knowledge of cause and effect.‘  (1) Only the relation of cause 
and effect can take us beyond 
the eviden ce of our memory 
and senses  
(2) All factual inferences to the 
unobserved are founded on the 
relation of cause and effect  
(6) All factual inferences to the 
unobserved are founded on 
experience  (4) Any effect is quite distinct 
from its cause, and many 
different effects are equally 
conceivable  
(3) Sensory perception of any 
object does not reveal either its 
causes or its effects  (5) Causal relations cannot be 
known a priori, but can only be 
discovered by experience   117 that a ‗just inference from [facts about] one object to [facts about] another‘ ( T 89) can only be based on 
causation: this relation alone can prov ide the requisite ‗connexion between the present fact and that which is 
inferred from it‘, without which any such inference ‗would be entirely precarious‘ ( E 27). 
Having concluded that all factual reasoning is causal, Hume now sets himself to prove that al l knowledge 
of causal relations is a posteriori: ‗I shall venture to affirm, as a general proposition, which admits of no 
exception, that the knowledge of this relation is not, in any instance, attained by reasonings à priori ; but arises 
entirely from expe rience‘ ( E 27). The argument for this proposition, (5) in the structure diagram, occupies the 
remainder of Part  i. Hume provides two lines of argument for it, the first of which is initially presented using a 
thought experiment. Suppose that the first man,  Adam, just after his creation by God, and with no previous 
experience to call on, had been confronted with water and fire. Simply from examining their ‗sensible 
qualities‘, Adam could not possibly have inferred what effects they would have. This illustrat es the general 
proposition (3): ‗No object ever discovers, by the qualities which appear to the senses, either the causes which 
produced it, or the effects which will arise from it‘ ( E 27). Hume thinks that this proposition, and what he takes 
to be its imm ediate cons equence (5), appear unsurprising ‗with regard to such objects, as we remember to have 
once been altogether u nknown to us‘, but when an object has been very familiar to us since our birth, ‗We are 
apt to imagine, that we could discover [its] effe cts by the mere operation of our reason, without experience.‘ 
(E 28). 
To show that this natural assumption is mistaken, Hume employs a second line of argument, summarized 
in the diagram as proposition (4), which starts with a characteristically Humean chal lenge: ‗Were any object 
presented to us, and were we required to pronounce concerning the effect, which will result from it, without 
consulting past o bservation; after what manner, I beseech you, must the mind proceed in this operation?‘ 
(E 29). He then go es on to claim that the challenge cannot be met: that there is no way in which pure Reason 
alone can discover causal connexions. For any cause and its effect are logically quite distinct; a  priori there is 
nothing in the one to suggest the idea of the othe r; so in advance of experience any imagined pairing between 
causes and effects will appear entirely arbitrary. And even if by luck we happen to guess the correct pairing, so 
that we succeed in ascribing to some particular cause its actual future effect, ne vertheless the conjunction of 
the two will still appear arb itrary from an a priori point of view, ‗since there are always many other effects, 
which, to reason, must seem fully as consistent and nat ural‘ ( E 30). 
It is important to notice that this second li ne of argument is significantly different from that with which 
Hume is commonly attributed, most notably by Stove.29 For Hume is not stating merely that cause and effect 
are logically distinct — that the one is conceivable without the other — and concluding  that for this reason 
alone there cannot be a legitimate infe rence from one to the other. He is starting from a much stronger premiss, 
namely, that a priori there is no di scernible connexion whatever  between cause and supposed effect: in advance 
of experie nce the conjunction of the two appears ‗entirely arbitrary‘, and the supposed effect is therefore no 
more ‗consistent and natural‘ than any number of alternatives.30 So Hume‘s argument here need not rely, as 
Stove supposes, on the deductivist assum ption tha t an inference from cause to effect is unreasonable unless the 
occurrence of the cause without the effect is logically inconceivable. It requires only the far more modest 
                                                      
29 ‗Hume, Probability, and Induction‘, 194; Proba bility and Hume’s Inductive Scepticism , 31. 
30 There is an interesting progression in Hume‘s thought here. In the Treatise  his argument does turn largely on mere 
concei vability, and the suggestion of arbitrariness is relatively muted: ‗we might .  . . have s ubstituted any other idea‘ ( T 87; cf. 
T 111–12). In the Abstract  this suggestion is expanded: ‗The mind can always conceive  any effect to follow from any cause, and 
indeed any event to follow upon another‘ ( A 650). By the time of the Enquiry  arbitrariness has clearly become Hume‘s principal 
emphasis, as it remains when he repeats the argument in the Dialogues  (D 145–6, quoted earlier).   118 principle that if the inference from cause to effect is to be justifiable a priori, t hen the connection between 
cause and effect must be at least to some extent non -arbitrary, and an examination of the cause must be able to 
yield some ground, however slight, for expecting that particular effect in preference to others. In adopting this 
compelling principle, Hume is not in any way commi tting himself to the deductivist view, that the only 
arguments of any kind which have any force are those that are logically conclusive.31 
Having completed the principal arguments of Part  I, Hume briefly states  its conclusion: ‗In vain, 
therefore, should we pretend to determine any single event, or infer any cause or effect, without the assistance 
of observ ation and experience.‘ ( E 30). He then adds two paragraphs which give valuable insight into his 
conception of science, spelling out some implications for scientific theorising in general and for applied 
mathematics in particular. First, science has absolute limits, in that it cannot possibly uncover the ‗ultimate 
springs and principles‘ of nature: in other word s it cannot provide pure rational insight into why things behave 
as they do. Such insight would require an a  priori grasp of causal relations, which Hume‘s arg uments have 
ruled out, so the most we can hope for is ‗to reduce the principles, productive of na tural phaeno mena, to a 
greater simplicity, and to resolve the many particular effects into a few general causes‘ ( E 30). Scie ntists can 
continue to search for systematic order in the operations of nature, but they cannot aspire to an ultimate 
explanation o f why things are ordered in the way that they are.  
Applied (‗mixed‘) mathematics might seem to provide an exception to this rule, since it appears to consist 
of rational deductions from the a priori principles of geometry and arithmetic. But Hume points ou t that any 
piece of applied mathematics also presupposes certain physical laws, for example the conservation of 
momentum, and any such law is incurably a posteriori. So although a priori mathematical reasoning certainly 
has a part to play in the applicatio n of such laws, ‗to determine their influence in particular instances‘, it 
remains true that ‗the discovery of the law itself is owing merely to experience, and all the abstract reasonings 
in the world could never lead us one step towards the knowledge of it‘ (E 31). 
5. All Factual Inferences to the Unobserved are Founded on the Uniformity 
Principle  
The first paragraph of Part  ii provides a summary of what Hume takes his argument to have established so far, 
and the second announces his intentions for what f ollows:  
 When it is asked, What is the nature of all our reasonings concerning matter of fact?  the proper answer seems to be, 
that they are founded on the relation of cause and effect. When again it is asked, What is the foundation of all our 
reaso nings an d conclusions concerning that relation?  it may be replied in one word, E XPERIENCE . But if we still 
carry on our sif ting humour, and ask, What is the foundation of all conclusions from experience?  this implies a new 
question .  . . 
  I shall content myself, in this section, with an easy task, and shall pretend [i.e. claim or aspire] only to give a 
negative answer to the question here proposed. I say then, that, even after we have experience of the operations of 
cause and effect, our co nclusions from that expe rience are not founded on reasoning, or any process of the 
understanding. ( E 32) 
                                                      
31 A suspicion might remain that the argument of Treatise  I. iii. 6, where Hume does seem content to argue from mere 
conceiv ability, is based on a general deductivist assumption. However a more plausible explanation is that he is here taking for 
granted a principle made explicit in the Abstract  (A 650, quoted in §4.1 above), that a priori evidence must yield demonstrative 
certa inty. We shall see in §7.2 that this assumption plays a role later in the Enquiry  version of the argument (when Hume denies 
the possibility of a priori non -demonstrative reasoning), but it clearly does not impl y any corresponding deductivism about a 
poster iori evidence.   119 Hume then embarks, in the very long third paragraph, on a slightly unfocused discussion combining two 
distinguishable lines of thought, the first of which can be represented a s follows:  
 
This part of Hume‘s argument is perhaps the least explicit of any, but as we shall see, it can nevertheless be 
spelt out with reasonable confidence on the basis of what he says both before and after it.  
The quotation above from the first parag raph of Part  ii makes clear that Hume‘s motive for investigating 
arguments from exper ience is to shed light on the general nature of factual inferences to the unobserved — this 
will explain the inference from (6) and (7) to (8) in the structure diagram. Hi s investigation begins negatively, 
with a reminder that our experiential reasonings cannot possibly be based on any perceptual knowledge of 
objects‘ ‗secret powers‘. But the positive account soon follows: ‗notwithstanding this ignorance of natural 
powers a nd principles, we always presume, when we see like sensible qualities, that they have like secret 
powers, and expect, that effects, similar to those which we have experienced, will follow from them‘ ( E 33). 
That this is indeed Hume‘s positive account is ma de clear by an otherwise puzzling back -reference two pages 
later, which he makes while summarizing this part of his argument, and which cannot plausibly be interpreted 
as referring to anything else: ‗We have said .  . . that all our experimental conclusions  proceed upon the 
supposition, that the future will be conformable to the past‘ ( E 35). So Hume clearly takes himself to have 
stated that (7) all arguments from experience, and hence (8) all factual inferences to the unobserved (since 
these are all founded  on experience), ‗proceed upon the supposition‘ that nature is uniform: that similar causes 
will, in the future, have similar effects to those which they have had in the past. For convenient reference I am 
calling this supposition the Uniformity Principle.  
We have here reached the pivot of Hume‘s argument. For most of what he has said so far has been 
devoted to establishing proposition (8) — that all factual inferences to the unobserved are founded on, or 
‗proceed upon the supposition‘ of, the Uniformity Pr inciple — while most of what follows will be devoted to 
showing that the Uniformity Principle has no possible foundation in Reason (‗the understanding‘). And it is 
from these two results that Hume draws his famous conclusion that our beliefs in [absent] ma tter of fact and 
real existence are ‘not founded on reasoning, or any process of the understanding‘ ( E 32). 
6. The Uniformity Principle is Not Founded on Either Sensory or Intuitive 
Evidence  
The previous section examined the first distinguishable line of t hought in the long third paragraph of Section  IV 
Part ii. It is now time to move on to the second line of thought, which can be represented as follows:  (6) All factual inferences to the 
unobserved are founded on 
experience  (7) All reasonings from 
experience are founded on the 
Uniformi ty Principle (UP)  
(8) All factual inferences to the 
unobserved are founded on UP   120  
As in Part  i Hume emphasizes our inability to discern an object‘s causes or effects by mere observatio n of its 
‗sensible qualities‘, but here the point of doing so is made clear only after he has sketched his positive account 
of experiential reasoning based on the Uniformity Principle: ‗there is no known connexion between the 
sensible qualities and the sec ret powers; and consequently .  . . the mind is not led to form such a conclusion 
concerning their constant and regular conjunction, by any thing which it knows of their nature‘ ( E 33). This 
passage straightforwardly expresses the implication from (3) to (9 ) as represented in the structure diagram 
above (though (9) as stated in the diagram makes explicit the contrast which Hume apparently intends, between 
direct perceptual  knowledge of object‘s secret powers, which he here denies, and indirect inferential  
knowledge based on past experience, which he has not yet ruled out).  
Having rejected the possibility of establishing the Uniformity Principle on the basis of direct perception 
(i.e. grounds that are ‗a  priori‘ in the sense that was explained earlier), Hume g oes on to examine whether past 
experience can provide any foundation for the principle. He is willing to allow that ‗ Experience  . . . can .  . . 
give direct  and certain  information of those precise objects .  . . and that precise period of time, which fell 
under its cognizance.‘ But his question is whether this gives any basis for extrapolating that experience ‗to 
future times, and other objects, which for aught we know, may be only in appearance similar‘ ( E 33–4). He 
spells out this logical issue very explic itly (in a passage which is here asterisked for future reference):  
(*) These two propositions are far from being the same, I have found that such an object has always been attended with 
such an effect , and I foresee, that other objects, which are, in appea rance, similar, will be attended with similar 
effects . I shall allow, if you please, that the one proposition may justly be inferred from the other .  . . But if you 
insist, that the inference is made by a chain of reasoning, I desire you to produce that re asoning. The connexion 
between these propositions is not intu itive. There is required a medium, which may enable the mind to draw such an 
inference, if indeed it be drawn by reasoning and argument. ( E 34) 
Past experience of uniformity might perhaps provide  grounds for the Uniformity Principle, but if so, since 
these grounds are not intuitive, they would have to be mediated by ‗reasoning and argument‘. Here we seem to 
have a fairly clear statement of the inference from (11) to (12) in the structure diagram a bove.  
As I have interpreted him here, Hume quickly dismisses any a  priori foundation for the Uniformity 
Principle, and does so on the basis of propositions (3) and (9) alone. Hence after this he does not further 
consider the possibility of there being some  a priori argument that would provide a link between observed and (11) The inference from past 
uniformity to future uniformity 
is not intuitive  (9) The Uniformity Principle 
(UP) is not founded on 
anything that we learn through 
the senses about objects‘ 
‗secret powers‘  (10) UP can be founded on 
Reason only if it is founded on 
experience (of uni formity)  (3) Sensory perception of any 
object does not reveal either its 
causes or its effects, and there 
is no known connexion 
between the sensible qualities 
and its ‗secret powers‘  
(12) UP can be founded on 
Reason only if it is founded on 
argument (via some medium 
enabling it to be inferred from 
past experience of uniformity)   121 unobserved (i.e.  an argument concluding that whatever  has happened in the past, however irregular and chaotic 
that might have been, can be expected to continue into the future). Instead, he turns his attention (as 
proposition (10) indicates) to the possibility of an a  posteriori argument for the Uniformity Principle, one based 
on the actual  evidence of experience, which would appeal to the character  of what has happened in the past 
(presumabl y its uniformity) in attempting to show that the past remains a reliable guide to the future. On this 
interpretation, therefore, the passage (*) quoted above makes perfect sense: Hume is challenging the reader to 
provide an inferential link from experience d uniformity to a prediction -warranting Uniformity Principle, and is 
pointing out that since this inference is not sanctioned by direct intuition, it must be mediated by reasoning 
involving intermediate steps if it is to provide an adequate foundation for that principle.  
There is, however, a subtly different way of viewing Hume‘s argument which can also claim some 
support from the text, though it treats it less as a continuous train of thought. On this alternative view, Hume‘s 
explicit questioning of whethe r experience can provide a foundation for the Uniformity Principle does not 
signal a complete shift of interest from a  priori to a  posteriori reasoning; rather, he is simply raising a number 
of sceptical queries in no particular order, in turn highlighting  difficulties in the attempt to found the principle 
on sensation, on experience, on intuition, and finally, on argument of any kind . This interpretation might seem 
to be favoured by one particular sentence in the text: ‗The bread, which I formerly eat [‗at e‘], nourished me; 
that is, a body of such sensible qualities, was, at that time, endued with such secret powers: But does it follow, 
that other bread must also nourish me at another time, and that like sensible qualities must always be attended 
with like secret powers?‘ ( E 34). On my preferred interpretation, Hume is focusing at this point on attempts to 
infer the Uniformity Principle from the past experience of uniformity , whereas at first sight this sentence gives 
the impression of appealing to one parti cular past experience  rather than to a pattern of uniform experiences. 
However this impression is not decisive (‗that time‘ can perfectly well refer to a period rather than to one 
occasion, as indeed would be suggested by the immediately preceding sentence ) and it is strongly 
counterbalanced by the otherwise smooth flow of Hume‘s logic, and the structural similarities with his 
reasoning in Part  i (where the discounting of sensation as an a  priori source of causal knowledge signals a 
complete shift of attent ion towards reasoning from experience). Moreover the alternative interpretation 
requires a somewhat artificial construal of the long passage (*) quoted earlier,32 and fails to account for the 
strong emphasis on past uniformity which dominates most of the re mainder of the section ( E 36–8). 
7. The Uniformity Principle is Not Founded on Argument  
The stage is now set for the climax of Hume‘s argument concerning induction, in which he denies the 
possibility of any good reasoning at all which could provide a found ation in Reason for the Uniformity 
Principle and thus for factual inference. Many commentators have treated this part as though it were virtually 
the whole of Hume‘s argument (Fogelin,33 for example, calls the entire argument concerning induction Hume‘s 
                                                      
32 See P.  J. R. Millican, ‗Hume‘s Argument concerning Induction: Structure and Interpretation‘, in S.  Tweyman (ed.), David 
Hume: Critical Assessments , 6 vols. (London and New York: Routledge, 1995), ii.  91–144 (repr. in D.  W. D. Owen (ed.), Hume: 
General Philosophy  (Aldershot and Burlington, Vermont: Ashgate, 2000), 165 –218), esp.  109–10, which presents this 
alternative view, and which interprets the passage in question as treating the Uniformity Principle as a rule of inference ra ther 
than as  a proposition. When writing that earlier paper, I had not fully appreciated the relevance here of Hume‘s notion of 
aprioricity, and hence overlooked the structural parallel with his reasoning in Part  i. Further evidence for my new interpretation 
comes fro m the Treatise , which explicitly focuses on arguments ‗founded on past experience , and on our remembrance of .  . . 
constant conjunction ‘ (T 88; cf. T 87, 163‡n.).  
33 R. Fogelin, Hume’s Skepticism in the Treatise of Human Nature  (London, Boston and Melbourne : Routledge & Kegan Paul, 
1985), 46.   122 ‗no-argument argument‘) so it is worth recalling that in the Enquiry  it is not only preceded by Part  i, but is also 
introduced by the line of thought outlined in §6 above, in which Hume takes the trouble to argue that some 
reasoning is ne cessary if the Unifor mity Principle is to be founded on Reason, a point which he apparently 
takes more or less for granted in the Treatise and Abstract . 
The structure of this most famous part of Hume‘s argument is admirably clear:  
 
It starts with the general claim (13) that ‗ All reasonings may be divided into two kinds, namely demonstrative 
reasoning .  . . and moral reasoning, or that concerning matter of fact and existence [i.e.  factual reasoning]‘ 
(E 35). The inference from (14) to (15) is then quickly drawn: ‗That there are  no demonstrative arguments in 
the case, seems evident; since it implies no contradiction, that the course of nature may change .  . . Now 
whatever is intelligible, and can be distinctly conceived, implies no contradiction, and can never be proved 
false by any d emonstrative argument or abstract reasoning à priori .‘ Propositions (13) and (15) together imply 
(16): ‗If we be, therefore, engaged by arguments to put trust in past experience, and make it the standard of our 
future judgment, these arguments must be  probable [i.e.  factual] only‘. But now the previous conclusion (8) 
can be appealed to in order to show (17) ‗that there is no argument of this kind‘ ( E 35). For (8) states that all 
factual inferences to the unobserved are founded on the Uniformity Princip le. ‗To endeavour, therefore the 
proof of [the Uniformity Principle] by probable [i.e.  factual] arguments .  . . must be evidently going in a circle, 
and taking that for granted, which is the very point in question.‘ ( E 35–6). 
Though superficially very stra ightforward, there is a lot going on here beneath the surface. For example, 
Hume is certainly not being entirely explicit when he states that ‗all reasonings‘ are either demonstrative or 
factual and goes on to rule out the possibility of either type of arg ument for the Uniformity Principle. For he 
was surely well aware that philosophers could, and would, concoct various defective  arguments to support this 
principle — indeed he considers such an argument himself, at E 36–8. What he is denying, therefore, is that 
any good  argument is available for the purpose, on the grounds: first, that all good  arguments are either 
demonstr ative or factual; secondly, that there cannot be a good  demonstrative proof of the falsity of what is (15) Future uniformity cannot 
be inferred demonstratively 
from past uniformity  (14) A change in the course  
of nature can be distinctly 
conceived, and hence is possible  (13) Two kinds of argument 
are available (for proving UP): 
demonstrative and factual  (8) All factual inferences to the 
unobserved are founded on the 
Uniformity Principle (UP)  
(16) If there is a good 
argument for UP, it must be a 
factual inference  
(17) Any factual inference to 
UP would be circular  (18) There is no good 
argument of any kind for UP   123 distinctly conceivable; and thirdly , that a good  factual argument cannot be circular.34 This passage is, in fact, 
an illustration of a general rule of Hume interpretation, that when he speaks of ‗all [or no] arguments 
[reasonings, inferences]‘, the qualific ation ‗good‘ is usually implied.35 
7.1 What does Hume Mean by ‘Demonstrative’?  
Hume‘s grounds for ruling out the possibility of a good argument for the Uniformity Principle also merit some 
discussion, not least because they have been thought by previous commentators to have significant 
interpretative implications. First, let us consider Hume‘s argument from distinct conceivability, which he uses 
to prove that matters of fact in general, and the Uniformity Principle in particular, cannot be established by any 
demonstrative reasoning:  
 The cont rary of every matter of fact is still possible; because it can never imply a contradiction, and is [distinctly] 
conceived by the mind .  . . We should in vain, therefore, attempt to demonstrate its falsehood. Were it 
demonstratively false, it would imply a contradiction, and could never be distinctly conceived by the mind. ( E 25–6) 
 . . . it implies no contradiction, that the course of nature may change .  . . Now whatever is intelligible, and can be 
distinctly conceived, implies no contradiction, and can nev er be proved false by any demonstrative argument or 
abstract reasoning à priori . (E 35) 
These passages (and others like them such as T 89, 95, A 650, 651, E 163–4) have been taken by many as 
decisive evidence that Hume holds the view (in Stove‘s words) ‗th at there can be no demonstrative arguments 
for any conclusion concerning matter of fact‘. This being so, it seems to follow that Hume must mean by a 
‗demonstrative argument‘ a ‗(valid) argument from necessarily true premisses ‘, since obviously a valid 
argument from mere matter -of-fact premisses might well have a matter -of-fact conclusion (whose falsehood 
would imply no contradiction and would be distinctly conceivable).36 Against this popular interpretation, 
however, I shall now claim that Hume means by ‗dem onstrative‘ much the same as we today mean by 
‗deductive‘, in the informal sense according to which an argument is deductive (or ‗deductively valid‘) if and 
only if the truth of its premisses guarantees the truth of its conclusion.37 
The argument sketched b elow is deductively valid in the modern informal sense, and would I believe 
undoubtedly be classed by Hume as ‗demonstrative‘:  
                                                      
34 The first of these three points will suffice if the terms ‗demonstrative‘ and ‗probable‘ are themselves interpreted normative ly, 
so that an argument only counts as  being of the appropriate type if it is a good  instanc e. But Hume himself does not consistently 
interpret them in this way, and in the Treatise  especially seems perfectly content to talk of ‗fallacious‘ demonstrations (e.g. T 53, 
80) or ‗unphilosophical‘ probable reasonings ( I. iii. 13). 
35 A related instance is at E 88: ‗it is from past experience, that we draw all inferences concerning the future, and .  . . conclude, 
that objects will always be conjoined together, which we find to have always been conjoined‘. Hume would surely not consider 
this statement refu ted by the irrational inferential practices of soothsayers (which may bear no relation to past experience) or by 
the popular ‗gambler‘s fallacy‘ (which may bear a contrary relation — ‗I‘ve lost every game so far, so I‘m bound to win the 
next!‘). Some other  examples of Hume‘s presupposing a restriction to good  inferences are at T 81, 163, E 78‡n., 150, 159, 
D 205, 227.  
36 The quotations from Stove are from Probability and Hume’s Inductive Scepticism , 35. Similar views have been expressed by a 
wide range of hi ghly respected authors, including Beauchamp and Rosenberg, Hume and the Problem of Causation , 43; Garrett, 
Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy , 87; J.  C. A. Gaskin, Hume’s Philosophy of Religion , 2nd edn. (Basingstoke 
and London: Macmillan, 1988) , 77; and J.  A. Passmore, Hume’s Intentions , 3rd edn. (London: Duckworth, 1980),  20. 
37 I say ‗much the same‘ to avoid commitment on fine details, for example whether an argument whose premisses are 
inconsistent, or irrelevant to a necessarily true conclusi on, could nevertheless count as ‗demonstrative‘.   124   1. The momentum of a body is equal to its mass multiplied by its velocity.  
  2. In any collision the total momentum of the coll iding bodies (in any given direction) is conserved.  
  
  If a spherical rigid body of mass 2  kg moving directly eastward at 25,000  m/s collides head -on and 
instantly sticks fast to a second spherical rigid body of mass 10,000  kg which is moving directly wes tward 
at 4 m/s (without any breakage, any simultaneous interaction with other bodies, any change of mass, etc.), 
then the second body will no longer be moving westward immediately after the collision.  
This is precisely the kind of applied mathematics which  Hume discusses at E 31 (in a paragraph which was 
mentioned in §4.2 above), and it is in fact a version of his own, rather imprecisely expressed, example:38 
 it is a law of motion, discovered by experience, that the moment or force of any body in motion is in the compound 
ratio or proportion of its solid contents and its velocity; and consequently, that a small force may remove the greatest 
obstacle .  . . if, by any contrivance .  . . we can encrease the velocity of that force, so as to make it an overmatch f or 
its antagonist.  
At this point Hume calls such reasonings ‗abstract‘ rather than ‗demonstrative‘, but the ancestor of this passage 
in the Treatise  makes the equation between the two explicit:  
 Mathematics, indeed, are useful in all mechanical operations . . . But ‘tis not of themselves they have any influence. 
. . . Abstract or demonstrative reasoning .  . . never influences any of our actions, but only as it directs our judgment 
concerning causes and effects. ( T 413–14) 
Hume is totally clear that the prem isses of the argument above are contingent and known only a  posteriori:39 
 Geometry assists us in the application of this law .  . . but still the discovery of the law itself is owing merely to 
experience, and all the abstract reasonings in the world could n ever lead us one step towards the knowledge of it. 
(E 31) 
So unless Hume is seriously inconsistent, it cannot be a defining condition of what he calls ‗abstract‘ or 
‗demonstrative‘ reasoning that it must have necessarily true or a  priori premisses.  
Quite a part from his discussion of applied mathematics, there is in Enquiry  IV another place where Hume 
makes clear that he is prepared to countenance the possibility of a ‗demonstrative‘ inference from a contingent 
premiss (ironically, immediately before the ver y application of the argument from distinct conceivability which 
is supposed by Stove and others to require a contrary interpretation). For when at E 35 Hume canvasses the 
possibility of a demonstrative inference to the Uniformity Principle, he certainly a ppears to have in mind an 
argument premissed on contingent past uniformity, as expressed in the passage (*) quoted earlier. Indeed if my 
interpretation in §6 above is correct, then the whole point of Hume‘s ‗no -argument argument‘ is precisely to 
consider s uch experiential  arguments for the Uniformity Principle.  
If Hume is prepared to accept that a demonstrative inference can have premisses that are not necessary 
truths,40 then what are we to make of his argument from distinct conceivability which is so often  adduced for 
the opposite conclusion? I suggest that we simply need to distinguish between the plausible claim  
                                                      
38 Here the 10,000  kg body exemplifies a ‗great obstacle‘, the 2  kg body a ‗small force‘, and change of direction counts as 
‗removal‘.  
39 I here gloss over the fact that the first premiss can plausibly be seen  as a definition  of ‗momentum‘, a subtlety that Hume 
overlooks. The important point for present purposes is simply that the argument indeed has at least one contingent premiss.   125  that no contingent proposition can be proved demonstratively, or is demonstrable, or can be demonstrated  
and the much stronger, but highly dubio us claim  
 that no contingent proposition can be the conclusion of any demonstrative inference . 
The former is both genuinely Humean and arguably true;41 the latter is neither, and Hume nowhere asserts it, 
despite the frequency with which Stove and others att ribute it to him. There is absolutely no difficulty, in 
Hume‘s system, with a demonstration that one matter of fact (e.g. ‗Mars is red and round‘) implies another 
(e.g. ‗Some round thing is coloured‘), nor — which is inferentially equivalent — with an argu ment which starts 
from the one matter of fact as a known or believed premiss, and concludes demonstratively that the other is 
therefore also true. All such arguments may be called ‗demonstrations‘ and described as ‗demonstrative‘, but 
they are not ‗demonst rations of‘ or ‗demonstrative proofs of‘ any matter of fact; all they can be said to 
demonstrate  is the deductive implication  between the matters of fact concerned.42 Hume‘s argument from 
distinct conceivability can accordingly be invoked whenever he wishes  to deny such a deductive relationship, 
as for example when he remembers ‗that such an object has always been attended with such an effect‘, but is 
denying the deducibility from it of the conclusion ‗that other objects, which are, in appearance, similar, w ill be 
attended with similar effects‘ ( E 34). Here the co -conceivability of the premiss and the negation of the 
conclusion is, as Hume points out, quite enough to wreck any such supposed deductive implication, and this 
fully accounts for the use of his arg ument from distinct conceivability.  
The argument from distinct conceivability aside, I believe the only other texts that in any way support the 
common misinterpretation I have been criticizing are Hume‘s comments about the limited province of 
demonstration , most explicitly: ‗It seems to me, that the only objects of the abstract sciences or of 
demonstration are quantity and number, and that all attempts to extend this more perfect species of knowledge 
beyond these bounds are mere sophistry and illusion.‘ ( E 163). But as he goes on to explain immediately 
following this sentence, Hume is pessimistic about the extent to which demonstration can be of significant use 
in the ‗moral sciences‘ not because demonstrative inferences from contingent premisses are by defi nition 
impossible, but rather because most of our ideas in ‗moral subjects‘ lack the precise and intricate relationships 
which enable lengthy demonstrations to be both reliable and fruitful in more quantitative disciplines ( E 163; cf. 
E 60–1, T 71).43 This explanation implies that the best potential source of useful demonstrative reasonings from 
contingent premisses will be in applied mathematics, nicely corroborating our earlier example involving the 
conservation of momentum. It is evidently no coincidence that Hume‘s discussion of ‗mixed mathematics‘ 
provides the crucial test case by which this interpretative dispute can be decisively settled.  
                                                                                                                                                                                   
40 He is presumably even prepared to accept that a demonstration can be premisse d on a necessary falsehood, since he often 
argues by reductio ad absurdum  (e.g. T 43: ‗we may produce demonstrations from these very ideas to prove, that they are 
impossible‘).  
41 ‗Arguably‘, because the details will depend on whether a ‗demonstrative proof ‘ is understood to exclude a  posteriori 
premisses, and on the interpretation of ‗contingent‘ in the light of issues in the theory of reference associated with the wo rk of 
Saul Kripke (issues very distant from any of Hume‘s concerns). Clearly the point will  be incontrovertible if ‗contingent‘ is 
equated with a  posteriori, and ‗prove demonstratively‘ (etc.) is interpreted as meaning deductive proof from a  priori principles.  
42 Though it is logically rather imprecise to describe a demonstrative argument from P to Q as being a demonstration that P 
implies Q, the inferential equivalence between the two makes it unsurprising if Hume sometimes conflates them.  
43 This does not imply that demonstrative arguments are excluded from non -quantitative disciplines, just that  these ‗pretended 
syllogistical reasonings‘ are likely to be rather trivial, in some cases reducing to a mere ‗imperfect definition‘ ( E 163). But even 
such trivial arguments can sometimes play a useful role, as in the ‗syllogism‘ which Philo advances in th e Dialogues  at D 142–3.  126 7.2 The Gap in Hume’s Argument  
It is just as well for the cogency of Hume‘s argument that his category of ‗demonstr ative‘ reasonings is not 
confined to those that are a  priori, for if it were so confined, then his insistence that the only available kinds of 
inference are ‗demonstrative‘ and factual -inductive would be manifestly  incorrect: he would quite gratuitously 
have left out of account any arguments that start from a  posteriori premisses but then proceed deductively 
rather than by appeal to causation and uniformity (‗Mars is red and round, therefore some round thing is 
coloured‘ being a simple example). Given Hume‘ s generally good logical instincts and philosophical 
competence, this provides additional corroboration of the interpretation of ‗demonstrative‘ advanced above. 
Nevertheless I believe that there is a different and genuine gap in Hume‘s argument at this poi nt, not because 
he overlooks the possibility of a  posteriori deductive inferences, but on the contrary because he overlooks the 
possibility of a  priori non -deductive inferences — that is, inferences which are less than deductively certain, 
but which are ‗f ounded on‘ considerations of a  priori probability rather than on experience.  
To see how this gap emerges, consider again Hume‘s grounds for ruling out the possibility of either a 
demonstrative or a ‗probable‘ foundation for the Uniformity Principle. The re ason he is confident that no 
demonstrative argument can do the job is that such an argument always yields absolute ce rtainty relative to its 
premisses, so that the mere distinct conceivability of a change in the course of nature (14) is suff icient to show 
that the Uniformity Principle cannot be established by demonstration (15) no matter what our premisses about 
the past might be. By contrast, Hume‘s reason for ruling out the possibility of a ‗probable‘ foundation for the 
Uniformity Principle is his claim t hat the only good form of such reasoning potentially available for this 
purpose is inductive inference, which is itself founded on experience (7) and hence on the Uniformity Principle 
(8) – thus any inductive argument which purports to provide a foundation  for the Uniformity Principle will be 
viciously circular, since it must be founded on the very principle for which it is attempting to provide a 
foundation.44 Putting all this t ogether, it follows that if there were a third form of reasoning which yielded 
merely probable inferences (rather than certainties), but did so on a priori grounds (rather than by extrapolation 
from past experience), then this form of reasoning would be completely immune to Hume‘s objections: he 
could not rule out the possibility of s uch reasoning‘s providing a foundation for the Uniformity Principle either 
on the basis of his argument from distinct conceivability or on the ground of circularity.  
It is highly debatable whether a priori probabilistic reasoning (based, for example, on th e Principle of 
Indifference, ‗logical probability‘ measures, considerations of invariance, or other supposedly non -empirical 
principles) is a genuine possibility or, if it is, whether such reasoning could conceivably provide a justification 
for the Uniform ity Principle. But those (such as Popper) who claim that Hume himself showed this particular 
route to be a dead end are certainly mistaken,45 for as we have seen, when he denies that ‗probable‘ reasoning 
could perform such a role, Hume has in mind only indu ctive reasoning from experience, not mathematical 
probabilistic reasoning that is a priori.46 There is, then, a definite gap in Hume‘s argument. Whether this gap 
                                                      
44 Note that this ‗foundational circularity‘ differs from the more familiar ‗deductive circularity‘ of an argument whose 
conclusion is also one of its premisses. In this sense, contra  Stove (‗Hume, Probability, and Induction‘, 205), a circular argument 
need not be deductively valid.  
45 A point made strongly against Popper and others by Stove, ‗Hume, Probability, and Induction‘, 189 –90. 
46 Hume apparently tries to keep an open mind about the existence of other ‗species‘ of reasoning (‗I cannot find, I cannot 
imagine any such reasoning. But I keep my mind still open to instruction‘; E 36), and may be aware that this is a weak point in 
his argument (‗there may still remain a suspicion, that the enumeration is not compleat‘; E 39). However h e is so far from 
conceiving of the possibility of a  priori probabilistic reasoning that he virtually defines ‗demonstrative‘ reasoning as that whose 
inferential steps are a  priori, in calling it ‗reasoning concerning relations of ideas‘ ( E 35; cf. T 124, A 650).   127 can be exploited by his opponents is an interesting and important question, and one that I have  explored at 
length elsewhere, but there is insufficient space to address it here.47 
8. Hume’s Conclusion: No Factual Inference to the Unobserved is Founded on Reason  
Having finished his ‗no -argument argument‘, the pieces of Hume‘s jigsaw are all complete. In typical fashion 
he leaves it to his reader to slot them into place, but if the account given above is correct, the way in which 
they are intended to fit together is evident from the structure and flow of his argument:  
 
The precise nature of Hume‘s conc lusion may seem unclear from his own words. We have already seen 
that he anticipates it when stating his intentions at E 32: ‗I say then, that, even after we have experience of the 
operations of cause and effect, our conclusions from that experience are not founded on reasoning, or any 
process of the understanding.‘ But when later summing up the section at E 39, he expresses his conclusion 
somewhat differently: ‗it is not reasoning which engages us to suppose the past resembling the future, and to 
expect si milar effects from causes, which are, to appearance, similar. This is the proposition which I intended 
to enforce in the present section.‘ There is a subtle difference here: at E 32 he is saying that our particular 
experiential conclusions  are not ‗founded  on reasoning, or any process of the understanding‘, whereas at E 39 
he seems to be saying that our supposition of the Uniformity Principle  is not so founded. If we move forward 
to the beginning of Section  V, however, we can find at E 41 a passage which he lps to reconcile these two 
readings: ‗we .  . . conclude .  . . in the foregoing section, that, in all reasonings from experience, there is a step 
taken by the mind, which is not supported by any argument or process of the understanding‘. So all reasonings 
from experience involve a step, namely the assumption of uniformity, which is not supported by ‗any process 
of the understanding‘ — which, indeed, cannot  be so supported if Hume‘s argument is correct. And Hume 
                                                      
47 This question is the principal focus of the second part of my doctoral dissertation ( Hume, Induction, and Probability , 
University of Leeds, Ph.D. thesis, 1996, 101 –237), which is in preparation as a book under the same title. Although the idea of 
a priori probability is often dismissed out of hand, the list of those who have attempted to provide such a foundation for 
induction is quite substantial, including Laplace, De  Finetti, Harrod, D.  C. Williams, Stove, Mackie, and Blackburn.  (18) There is no good 
argument of any kind for UP  (20) CONCLUSION  
No factual inference to the 
unobserved is founded on 
Reason  (8) All factual inferences to the 
unobser ved are founded on the 
Uniformity Principle (UP)  
(19) UP is not founded on 
Reason  
(12) UP can be founded on 
Reason only if it is founded on 
argument (via some medium 
enabling it to be inferred from 
past experience of uniformity)   128 goes on in Section  V to provide an alternative explanation of why we make this step: it is entirely non -rational, 
and is the product not of Reason but merely of a particular one of our brute ‗natural instincts, which no 
reasoning or process of the thought and understanding is able, either to produce, o r to prevent‘ ( E 46–7). This 
instinct is what ‗makes us expect, for the future, a similar train of events with those which have appeared in the 
past‘ ( E 44), and Hume accordingly calls it ‗custom‘, or ‗habit‘. Here, then, is the answer to his original 
enqu iry at E 26 regar ding ‗the nature of that evidence, which assures us of any [absent] matter of fact‘: ‗All 
inferences from experience, therefore, are effects of custom, not of reasoning. .  . . Without the influence of 
custom, we should be entirely ignorant  of every matter of fact, beyond what is immediately present to our 
memory and senses.‘ ( E 43–5). 
9. Coda: ‘Secret Powers’, Causal Realism, and a Parting Shot  
In both the Treatise  and the Enquiry  Hume‘s main argument finishes with his circularity charge ag ainst any 
would -be ‗probable‘ justification of the Uniformity Principle. But in both he goes on to refute one natural 
attempt that might be made to justify induction by appeal to objects‘ ‗powers‘.48 In the Treatise  the way in 
which Hume introduces this dis cussion makes very clear its status as a rounding -off illustration of the impact 
of his arg ument, rather than as an essential component (and accordingly I call it the argument‘s ‗coda‘):  
 Shou‘d any one think to elude this argument; and without determining  whether our reasoning on this subject be 
deriv‘d from demonstration or probability, pretend that all conclusions from causes and effects are built on solid 
reasoning: I can only desire, that this reasoning may be produc‘d, in order to be expos‘d to our ex amination. It may, 
perhaps, be said, that after experience of the constant conjunction of certain objects, we reason in the following 
manner. Such an object is always found to produce another. ‘Tis impossible it cou‘d have this effect, if it was not 
endow‘ d with a power of production. The power necessarily implies the effect; and therefore there is a just 
foundation for drawing a conclusion from the existence of one object to that of its usual attendant. The past 
production implies a power: The power implie s a new production: And the new production is what we infer from the 
power and the past production. ( T 90) 
The Enquiry  version of this attempt to provide a foundation for induction is subtly different, in that instead of 
appa rently using the existence of a  cause and effect relationship to infer the existence of a power, it takes for 
granted from the start that objects have powers and appeals to the constancy  of causal relations to infer a 
continuing ‗connexion between the sensible qualities and the secret p owers‘ ( E 36).49 But the forceful 
refutation that follows is equally decisive against either version:  
 When a man says, I have found, in all past instances, such sensible qualities conjoined with such secret powers:  And 
when he says, similar sensible qualit ies will always be conjoined with similar secret powers ; he is not guilty of a 
tauto logy, nor are these propositions in any respect the same. You say that the one proposition is an inference from 
the other. But you must confess that the inference is not in tuitive; neither is it demonstrative: Of what nature is it 
                                                      
48 In the Enquiry  Hume first presents an additional new argument (but one reminiscent of T 88 and 163 –5) designed to 
strengthen his claim that the continuing uniformity of causal relations cannot be established a posteriori by Reason, on the 
ground that if it could be so e stablished it would be knowable ‗upon one instance‘ and not (as we find) only ‗after a long course 
of uniform experiments‘ ( E 36; cf. E 43). This argument may indeed be quite effective against the perceptual view of Reason 
(since perceived  connexions can r easonably be expected to be unaffected by mere repetition), but Hume‘s inability to imagine 
any kind of reasoning to which numbers of instances would be rel evant suggests a (historically unsurprising) poor grasp of 
statistical inference.  
49 This is only to be expected, given the discussion in §6 above. Hume also considers a similar move later in the Treatise  version 
at T 91 (‗Shou‘d it be said, that we have experience, that the same power continues united with the same object  . . .‘).  129 then? To say it is e xperimental, is begging the question. For all inferences from experience suppose, as their 
foundation, that the future will r esemble the past, and that similar powers will be co njoined with similar sensible 
qualities. .  . . It is impossible, therefore, that any arguments from experience can prove this resemblance of the past 
to the future; since all these arguments are founded on the supposition of that resemblance. ( E 37–8; cf. T 91) 
Here we clearly have a straightforward application of Hume‘s central argument, rather than a significant 
independent addition to it. This elegant refutation does, however, help to settle an important issue concerning 
the relationship between Hume‘s r easoning about induction and his theory of causation.  
9.1 The Place of Causation in Hume’s Argument  
In the Treatise  Hume‘s argument concerning induction is presented in the context of his analysis of causation. 
This can give the impression that the one rel ies heavily on the other, and many books on Hume have tended to 
confirm this impression by treating the two together, often within the co nfines of a single chapter. But the 
quotation above from E 37–8 shows clearly that Hume‘s case against the rational fou ndation of induction is 
quite independent of his ‗regularity‘ analysis of causation, for even if causation is instead a matter of ‗secret 
powers‘, and even if all observed As have in fact been endowed with the secret power to produce B, this in 
itself can give us no reason for supposing that some hitherto unobserved  A has been or will be similarly 
endowed. The point is that because the connection between A and that power is not a priori, we can only 
justifiably infer a continued conjunction between them if we already have some justification for e xtrapolating 
from observed to unobserved. So an analysis of causation in terms of ‗secret powers‘ (or ‗natural necessities‘, 
as they might now be called) provides no answer whatever to the inductive sceptic.  
Since Hu me‘s views about induction do not depend on his own analysis of the notion of causation, this 
naturally raises the question of why that notion should nevertheless feature so prominently in his famous 
argument, and whether it plays any essential role there.  Appealing to the structural analysis developed above, 
we can see that causation features importantly in Hume‘s argument at only two points: first, in Part  i, where he 
uses it as a ‗middle term‘ for deducing that all factual reasoning to the unobserved is based on experience 
(propositions (1) to (6)‡); and secondly, at the beginning of Part  ii (E 33), where he appeals again to his earlier 
claim about our inability to perceive any connexion between objects‘ powers and their sensible qualities 
(proposition (3 )‡), and goes on to draw the corollary that the Uniformity Principle cannot be justified on the 
basis of such pe rception (proposition  (9)‡). Taking these two together, it seems that causation plays a role in 
Hume‘s argument only to the extent of enabling h im to conclude that inferences beyond the present testimony 
of our memory and senses (including inferences about the Uniformity Principle) cannot be drawn a priori from 
our immediate perceptions and hence must be based on past experience . However this prop osition seems just 
as plausible in its own right without any mention of causation, and it can moreover be supported directly by 
most of the examples, and much of the argumentation, that he provides in Part  i. 
Hume‘s argument, therefore, can apparently be r econstructed without any essential mention of causation 
(a point of which I shall take advantage in §10 below, when presenting a simplified version). And Hume 
himself might have welcomed such a reconstruction, for it would rid him of any dependence on his initial 
premiss (1), about which he seems to have some doubts later in the Enquiry  when in Section  X he turns his 
attention to inferences based on human testimony. When these doubts arise, it is interesting and perhaps 
signif icant that he deals with them i n exactly the way that would be required to permit such a reconstruction of 
his Section  IV argument, for he makes no attempt to defend this premiss, but instead simply remarks that it can 
be bypassed for his current purposes, on the grounds that any testim onial inference to the unobserved, even if it 
is admitted to be non -causal, must nevertheless be based on experience:   130  This species of reasoning, perhaps, one may deny to be founded on the relation of cause and effect. I  shall not 
dispute about a word. It will be sufficient to observe, that our assurance in any argument of this kind is derived from 
no other principle than our observation of the veracity of human testimony, and of the usual conformity of facts to 
the reports of witnesses. ( E 111) 
This remark  is tantalizing, but unfortunately we shall probably never know whether Hume ever noticed its 
relevance to his argument concerning induction.  
9.2 Induction and Hume’s Alleged Causal Realism  
Hume‘s ‗coda‘ can also shed light on an issue of considerable rece nt scholarly debate — namely, whether he 
was a believer in genuinely mind -independent necessities underlying the observed regularities that lead us to 
interpret our experience causally and to draw inductive inferences accordingly. The issue is too complex to 
explore in any detail here, so I shall confine myself to three points regarding the relevance of Enquiry  IV to this 
debate. The first concerns the language of ‗secret powers‘ which Hume uses throughout Part  ii (especially in 
the coda), and which has bee n thought by some to show that he firmly accepts a notion of mind -independent 
powers in objects, quite different from any ‗idea‘ that would be sanctioned by his empiricist ‗regularity‘ 
analysis in Enquiry  VII (E 62–3, 75 –7).50 For example:  
 no philosopher, who is rational and modest, has ever pretended to .  . . show distinctly the action of that power, which 
produces any single effect .  . . (E 30) 
 . . . nature .  . . conceals from us those powers and principles, on which the influence of .  . . objects entire ly depends. 
. . . but as to that wonderful force or power .  . . of this we cannot form the most distant conception. But 
notwithstanding this ignorance of natural powers and principles, we always presume, when we see like sensible 
qualities, that they have like secret powers .  . . (E 32–33) 
 . . . experience .  . . teaches us, that those .  . . objects .  . . were endowed with such powers and forces. ( E 37) 
But these quotations show nothing of the kind, as is made clear by a footnote which Hume inserted into th e 
1750 edition, directly after the words ‗natural powers‘ in the second quotation above:  
 The word, Power, is here used in a loose and popular sense. The more accurate explication of it would give 
additional evidence to this argument. See Sect. 7. ( E 33‡n. ) 
I believe Hume added this footnote in direct response to criticisms from his longtime friend Henry Home, Lord 
Kames, who in 1751 brought to publication his Essays on the Principles of Morality and Natural Religion ,51 
including an essay ‗Of our Idea of Pow er‘ which attacks what he takes to be Hume‘s official view, that we 
have no idea of causation in objects beyond mere regularity. Kames presents the ‗secret power‘ language of 
Section  IV as evidence that Hume himself cannot consistently accept this ‗violent  paradox‘,52 so Hume‘s 
insertion of this footnote — apparently expressly  to make clear that such language is to be interpreted in the 
light of his Section  VII analysis and hence cannot conflict with it — seems strongly to suggest that Kames‘ 
                                                      
50 See D.  W. Livingston,  Hume's Philosophy of Common Life  (Chicago and London: University of Chicago Press, 1984), 154 –6 
and G.  Strawson, The Secret Connexion  (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 1989), ch.  16. Both Livingston and Strawson 
acknowledge the E 33 footnote quoted b elow, but seem unaware of its possible context in the debate between Hume and Kames, 
which I believe greatly clarifies its significance.  
51 Henry Home, Essays on the Principles of Morality and Natural Religion  (Edinburgh, 1751), published anonymously.  
52 See pp. 290–2 for the allegation of inconsistency, and p.  283 for the description of Hume‘s position as a ‗violent paradox‘ (an 
allusion to T 166).   131 interpretation of Hume‘s position was correct (as indeed might be expected given their intimacy and mutual 
philosophical interests).53 Thus Hume‘s use of the language of ‗powers‘ in Sections  IV and V cannot now be 
brought as evidence for any departure from his Section  VII view. If anything quite the reverse, because the 
footnote seems to confirm that he sees Section  VII as revealing the ‗precise meaning‘ ( E 62; cf. E 67‡n., 82) 
behind our causal notions even when those are used in a ‗loose and popular‘ manner.  
My second po int arises from the result of Hume‘s coda (summarized in §9 and briefly discussed in  §9.1). 
There he argues that the notion of an objective causal power, even if it is supposed to be coherent, can provide 
no escape from his sceptical conclusions, because e xtrapolation into the future of a past constant conjunction 
between (for example) A and the secret power to produce B  has no more basis in Reason than extrapolation of 
the constant conjunction between A and B which it is invoked to explain. Hence in so far  as the supposition of 
secret powers is intended to provide an explanation of the consistency of objects’ behaviour over time  — to 
remove what can otherwise seem the outrageous coincidence that the world should continue to operate 
according to the same law s, microsecond after microsecond, for billions of years — that supposition is entirely 
useless . If Hume is right, there is no way that the uniformity of the laws of nature over time can be accounted 
for, whether in terms of underlying metaphysical ‗necessi ties‘ or anything else, and if this implies that we have 
no option but to accept an outrageous coincidence as fact, then so be it. At any rate, Hume‘s forceful reasoning 
clearly indicates that he himself would be quite unmoved by any argument for the exist ence of objective 
powers based on the avoidance of inductive coincidence.54 
My final point contrasts somewhat with the first two, and suggests a possible resolution of the causal 
realist debate by identifying a sense in which Hume is indeed committed to acc epting the ascription of powers 
to objects, while neither denying the subjective origin of our corresponding idea, nor appealing to any 
underlying metaphysical necessity of the type that we have just seen rejected. Consider three passages, the first 
of whi ch is from his important paragraph on ‗mixed mathematics‘ discussed above in §7.1:  
 it is a law of motion, discovered by experience, that the moment or force of any body in motion is in the compound 
ratio or proportion of its solid contents and its velocit y . . . (E 31) 
 We find by experience, that a body at rest or in motion continues for ever in its present state, till put from it by some 
new cause; and that a body impelled takes as much motion from the impelling body as it acquires itself. These are 
facts. When we call this a vis inertiae , we only mark these facts, without pretending to have any idea of the inert 
power; in the same manner as, when we talk of gravity, we mean certain effects, without comprehending that active 
power. It was never the meanin g of Sir I SAAC  NEWTON  to rob second causes of all force or energy .  . . (E 73‡n.)  
 the idea of power  is relative as much as that of cause ; and both have a reference to an effect, or some other event 
constantly conjoined with the former. When we consider th e unknown  circumstance of an object, by which the 
degree or quantity of its effect is fixed and determined, we call that its power: And accordingly, it is allowed by all 
philosophers, that the effect is the measure of the power. But if they had any idea of  power, as it is in itself, why 
                                                      
53 See Mossner, The Life of David Hume , 119 for Kames‘ description (to Boswell) of how he had invited Hume to ‗t ry to beat 
your Book [i.e.  the Treatise ] into my head‘. Evidently he made considerable efforts to understand Hume, exchanged manuscripts 
with him prior to publication (notably that of the Enquiry  or Philosophical  Essays , see HL  i 111), and particularly dis cussed the 
issue of causation with him over many years. For background on Hume‘s relationship with Kames, see also Mossner, pp.  58–62, 
410–12. 
54 Such an argument seems to be the main theme of Strawson, The Secret Connexion , ch. 5, though Strawson here does  not 
entirely distinguish between invoking causal powers to explain uniformity over time  (which I am here denying that Hume would 
accept) and invoking causal powers to explain regular patterns of behaviour at a time  (which, in the sense discussed below, 
Hume might accept).   132 could not they measure it in itself? The dispute whether the force of a body in motion be as its velocity, or the square 
of its velocity .  . . needed not be decided by comparing its effects in equal or unequal times; but by a direct 
mensuration and comparison. ( E 77‡n.)  
Expressed using a variety of notions — moment , force , power , energy  — which Hume sees as being ‗all nearly 
synonimous‘ with necessity  (T 157),55 these passages strongly suggest that he recognizes the legitimacy  of such 
notions if properly understood. The only content that we can give to any notion of force, power, or necessity 
(i.e. our only idea of it) is in terms of the observable regular behaviour of objects and our tendency to draw 
inferences accordingly, bu t nevertheless once we have such an idea it can quite properly  be ascribed to objects 
themselves, since only thus can it feature in quantitative scientific explanations. Such explanations form the 
heart of Newtonian science, serving ‗to reduce the principl es, productive of natural phaenomena, to a greater 
simplicity, and to resolve the many particular effects into a few general causes‘ ( E 30). So the ascription of 
powers to objects has considerable instrumental value, even if it sits rather uneasily with Hu me‘s insistence 
that the corresponding idea has a subjective source. Indeed his own ultimate position remains philosophically 
rather elusive, appearing to be more than mere instrumentalism — else why insist on finding an impression to 
clarify the idea? — but at the same time seeming to deny the literal meaningfulness of ascribing that clarified 
idea to objects (e.g. T 164–8, 266 –7, E 77, 93). Whether there is coherent position here is certainly debatable, 
for literal ascription to objects appears to be requ ired in order to reap the scientific rewards (a disanalogy with 
the easier cases of secondary and moral qualities, where objective ascription plays no such instrumental role). 
All this perhaps explains why the exegetical debate has proved so intractable: H ume‘s position combines 
elements that seem to imply literal ascription of powers to objects, with other elements that seem to 
contradict  it. 
9.3 The Reasoning of Peasants, Infants, and Brute Beasts  
Having completed his abstract philosophical arguments for the thesis that factual inferences are not founded on 
Reason, Hume ends Section  IV with a relatively down -to-earth parting shot:  
 It is certain, that the most ignorant and stupid peasants, nay infants, nay even brute beasts, improve by experience, 
and lear n the qualities of natural objects, by observing the effects, which result from them. .  . . If you assert, 
therefore, that the u nderstanding of [a] child is led [to draw inferences about the future] by any process of argument 
or ratiocination, I may justly  require you to produce that argument .  . . You cannot say, that the argument is abstruse, 
and may possibly escape your enquiry; since you confess, that it is obvious to the capacity of a mere infant. If you 
hesitate, therefore .  . . or . . . produce any i ntricate or profound argument, you .  . . give up the question, and confess, 
that it is not reasoning which engages us to suppose the past resembling the future, and to expect similar effects from 
causes, which are, to appearance, similar. This is the propo sition which I intended to enforce in the present section. 
(E 39) 
This is effective rhetoric, but its philosophical significance is less clear, for of course the inductive rationalist is 
unlikely to claim that infants base their expectations on Reason. Rat her, he will concede that infants are 
supplied (by God, perhaps) with appropriate instincts which initially govern their thinking, but he will maintain 
that these instincts are, or can be, supplanted by Reason as that faculty develops. Hume‘s parting shot,  then, 
has little force unless it is supplemented by other considerations such as the desirability of a simple and 
uniform theory of all human and animal reasoning. It is therefore worth noting that precisely this point is 
                                                      
55 Cf. A 656 and E 62, 77‡n. The synonymy of ‗power‘ and ‗necessary connexion‘ is made particularly explicit in the original 
title of Enquiry  VII: ‗Of the Idea of Power, or Necessary Connexion‘.   133 emphasized by Hume later in the Enquiry , in the important but relatively neglected Section  IX, ‗Of the Reason 
of Animals‘ (itself a descendant of the similarly titled Section I. iii. 16 of the Treatise ). 
10. The Logic of Hume’s Argument  
We can now at last put together a complete detailed structure diagram of Hume‘s argument in Section  IV of the 
Enquiry , which is shown in the appendix to this paper followed by a table setting out, for each numbered 
proposition in the structure diagram, those precise passages of the Enquiry  text that I have interpreted as stating 
(or in two cases merely implying) that very proposition. The diagram and table together prove clearly, I hope, 
that the interpretation I am advancing is based squarely on Hume‘s text.56 
The purpose of the present section, however, is to analyse the underlying logic of Hume‘s argument, and 
for this it will be more fruitful to consider a simplified version of its structure (albeit one that is 
straightforwardly derived from the detailed diagram), in which all of the principal stages are e xpressed in terms 
of Hume‘s ‗founded on‘ relation. This also facilitates easy reference to these stages through semi -formal 
abbreviation, using symbols which will I hope will be fairly self -explanatory:  
 
 
                                                      
56 For a detailed comparison with Stove‘s wel l-known (but seriously deficient) structure diagram, see Millican, ‗Hume‘s 
Argument Concerning Induction‘, 118 –24. The same article goes on (pp.  124–6) to discuss and criticize Stove‘s formal 
interpretation of Hume‘s conclusion.  All factual inferences to the 
unobserved are founded on 
experience: FO(f,e)  
All factual inferences to the 
unobserved are founded on 
UP: FO(f,u)  
No factual inference to the 
unobserved is founded on 
Reason: ¬FO(f,R) All reasonings from experience 
are founded on the Uniformity 
Principle (UP): FO(e,u)  
UP is not founded on sensory 
evidence: ¬FO(u,s)  UP is not founded on 
demonstrative inference (from 
past uniformity): ¬FO(u,d)  
UP is not founded on Reason: 
¬FO(u,R)  UP is not founded on  
intuitive inference (from past 
uniformity): ¬FO(u,i)  UP is not founded on factual 
inference to the unobserved: 
¬FO(u,f)  Key to Formulae  
FO(x,y): x is founded on y 
d: demonstrative inference  
e: reasoning from experience  
f: factual i nference to the 
unobserved  
i: intuition  
R: Reason  
s: sensation  
u: the Uniformity Principle  
  134 A logical sketch of Hume’s argument in Enquiry  IV 
 
This diagram shows how Hume‘s argument pivots around the Uniformity Principle, and also reveals clearly its 
fundamental dependence on the logic of the ‗founded on‘ relation, which underlies all of its major stages. This 
logic is manifested in the followin g four conditional formulae, which together fully account for the inferential 
structure represented in the diagram:  
(f1)  FO(f,e) & FO(e,u) → FO(f,u)  
(f2)  FO(f,u) → ¬FO(u,f)  
(f3)  ¬FO(u,s) & ¬FO(u,i) & ¬FO(u,d) & ¬FO(u,f) → ¬FO(u,R)  
(f4)  FO(f,u) & ¬FO(u, R) → ¬FO(f,R)  
The third of these carries obvious implications for Hume‘s notion of Reason, which will be discussed later 
(in §10.3). But the other three formulae seem to exemplify more general logical properties of the ‗founded on‘ 
relation, providing impo rtant constraints on its interpretation. Let us take these in turn, before going on to 
discuss what that relation might mean in the light of these constraints.  
10.1  The Logic of Hume’s ‘Founded On’ Relation  
(f1) , the first formula listed above, appears to  be a straightforward instance of transitivity , indicating that 
Hume takes ‗founded on‘ to be in general a transitive relation,57 just as we might expect given the nature of the 
foundational metaphor. Moreover this transitivity is clearly the key inferentia l mechanism in the first half of 
Hume‘s argument, which instantiates a typical transitive chain: factual inference is founded on causal 
reasoning, which is founded on reasoning from experience, which is founded on the Uniformity Principle, and 
from this Hu me takes it to follow that factual inference is founded on the Uniformity Principle.  
(f2)  is equally straightforward and unsurprising, indicating that Hume takes the ‗founded on‘ relation to 
be asymmetric ,58 which again is just what would be expected from t he foundational metaphor. Indeed given the 
transitivity of the ‗founded on‘ relation, its asymmetry follows immediately from the fact that nothing can be 
founded on itself (i.e. the ‗founded on‘ relation is irreflexive ).59 This evidently provides the logica l basis for 
Hume‘s denial that the Uniformity Principle can be founded on factual inference, for it explains why such a 
breach of asymmetry would imply a breach of irreflexivity, and hence would be ‗going in a circle, and taking 
that for granted, which is the very point in question‘ ( E 36). 
Formula (f4) , however, is altogether more perplexing, since although it may appear at first glance to 
have a broadly transitive character, in fact the pattern of inference that it instantiates seriously conflicts with 
                                                      
57 A relation is transitive  if whenever x bears the relation to y, and y to z, it follows that x bears the relation to z. Examples of 
transitive relations include equivalence relations (e.g. ‗equal in height to‘), weak ordering relations (e.g. ‗no greater tha n‘, ‗at 
least as tall as‘ ), and strict ordering relations (e.g. ‗less than‘, ‗heavier than‘, ‗descended from‘).  
58 A relation is asymmetric  if whenever x bears the relation to y, it follows that y does not  bear the relation to x. Examples of 
asymmetric relations include those in wh ich the two relata fall into different categories (e.g. ‗husband of‘) and strict ordering 
relations. Transitivity and asymmetry together imply that ‗founded on‘ is itself a strict ordering relation.  
59 If a relation is not asymmetric, then there is at least  one pair x and y such that x bears the relation to y and also y bears the 
relation to  x. But if this is so, then the transitivity of the relation would immediately imply that x bears the relation to x, and y to 
y, which would mean that the relation could not be irreflexive.   135 transitivity and asymmetry,60 and is anyway not one that Hume accepts in general. To see this, consider a 
similar formula but with reasoning from experience (e) substituted in place of Reason (R):  
   FO(f,u) & ¬FO(u,e) → ¬FO(f,e)  
Hume would certainly accept the antecedent of this conditional, that factual inference is founded on the 
Uniformity Principle and that the Uniformity Principle is not founded on reasoning from experience.61 But he 
would equa lly certainly deny its consequent, which contradicts his frequent claim that all factual inference is 
founded on (reasoning from) experience. So unlike the relatively straightforward (f1)  and (f2) , formula 
(f4)  leaves us with a genuine puzzle about what is  going on in the logic of Hume‘s argument. It might seem 
that he must be guilty of an error here, perhaps mistaking the logic of his ‗founded on‘ relation or failing to 
apply it consistently, or perhaps equivocating on the relation‘s meaning, in which case  presumably his 
argument might be vitiated by this ambiguity in its central notion. Fortunately, however, the puzzle can be 
resolved by investigating just what Hume means by the relation, and this resolution will turn out to be more 
subtle and far less dam aging than these unpalatable alternatives would suggest.  
Hume talks of the ‗founded on‘ relation as connecting a wide range of different types of thing — beliefs, 
conclusions, principles, relations, inferences, types of inference, faculties, even ‗experien ce‘ — and he himself 
provides a variety of different paraphrases for it. He repeatedly states, for example, that:  
(a) All factual inferences ‗are founded on the relation of cause and effect‘ ( E 27, 32; cf. E 35). This is paraphrased in 
terms of such reason ing requiring ‗knowledge of cause and effect‘ ( E 27; cf. E 35). 
(b) All our reasonings and conclusions concerning cause and effect ‗are founded entirely on experience‘ ( E 164; cf. 
E 32). This is paraphrased as ‗our knowledge of [cause and effect] is derive d entirely from experience‘ ( E 35). 
(c) All inferences from experience ‗are founded on the supposition of [the] resemblance of the past to the future‘ ( E 38; 
cf. E 104). This is paraphrased as ‗all our experimental conclusions proceed upon the supposition,  that the future will 
be conformable to the past‘ ( E 35). 
(d) Factual inferences ‗are not founded on reasoning, or any process of the understanding‘ ( E 32). This is paraphrased by 
saying that in all such inferences, ‗there is a step taken by the mind, whic h is not supported by any argument or 
process of the understanding‘ ( E 41). 
What seems to be in common to all of these is the issue of the source of authority  for the beliefs, theories, 
inferences, and inferential methods whose foundation is in question. A ccordingly, when Hume states that one 
thing ‗is founded on‘ another, I suggest he means that it derives its authority  from that other. This suggestion is 
corroborated by his sometimes using precisely this sort of language to express his familiar claim that  all factual 
inferences are ‗founded on‘ experience:  
 None of [the sciences or arts] can go beyond experience, or establish any principles which are not founded on that 
authority. ( T xviii)  
 It is experience only, which gives authority to human testimony; and it is the same experience, which assures us of 
the laws of nature. ( E 127) 
                                                      
60 Even if the three substituted terms are required to be distinct, it generates an inconsistency with asymmetry whenever one te rm 
is founded on two others or (given transitivity) whenever one term is founded on a second which is in turn  founded on a third.  
61 That the Uniformity Principle is not founded on reasoning from experience follows immediately from the asymmetry of the 
‗founded on‘ relation, given that reasoning from experience is founded on the Uniformity Principle.   136 Moreover if this is indeed what Hume means by ‗founded on‘, then it explains why he should take for granted 
that it is a transitive relation, because if X derives its authority from Y, and Y derives its authority from Z, then 
it will indeed be true that X derives its authority, albeit indirectly, from Z — authority is (so to speak) passed 
down the chain, a metaphor which Hume himself uses in a related context:  
 ‘Tis obvious all t his chain of argument or connexion of causes and effects, is at first founded on those characters or 
letters, which are seen or remember‘d, and that without the authority either of the memory or senses our whole 
reasoning wou‘d be chimerical and without fo undation. Every link of the chain wou‘d in that case hang upon 
another; but there wou‘d not be any thing fix‘d to one end of it, capable of sustaining the whole; and consequently 
there wou‘d be no belief nor evidence. ( T 83; cf. E 46) 
This, then, accounts for the ‗transitive‘ part of Hume‘s reasoning: if factual inference derives its authority from 
reasoning concerning cause and effect, and that derives its authority from experiential reasoning, and that 
derives its authority from the Uniformity Principle, then it will indeed be true that factual inference derives its 
authority (albeit indirectly) from the Uniformity Principle.  
It is equally easy, on these terms, to explain the ‗asymmetric‘ part of Hume‘s reasoning represented by 
formula (f2) , for clearly tw o things cannot each derive their authority from the other. But as we have seen, 
this straightforward logic changes when Hume comes to consider, later in the argument, the question of 
whether the Uniformity Principle (and hence factual inference) is founde d on, or derives its authority from, 
Reason. This happens, I suggest, because Reason is here the ultimate source  of the relevant authority, so that 
an assertion or denial of its sanction is very naturally understood as implying more than a mere assertion o r 
denial of possible derivative authority. The subtle shift of meaning can be illustrated by spelling out examples 
of the two types of assertion side by side:  
 (1)    Factual reasoning is founded on the Uniformity Principle  
 means   Factual reasoning derive s its authority from the Uniformity Principle  
 which means  Factual reasoning derives whatever authority it possesses  from the Uniformity Principle.  
 
(2)    The Uniformity Principle is founded on Reason  
 means   The Uniformity Principle derives its authority  from Reason  
 which means  The Uniformity Principle has authority  derived from Reason.  
This fundamental but subtle difference fully legitimates Hume‘s reasoning, and without supposing him to be 
guilty of any crude equivocation in his use of the ‗founded on‘  relation. For thus interpreted the step in his 
argument represented by formula (f4)  turns out to be clearly valid:  
  137 Interpreting Hume‘s ‗founded on‘ relation in terms of the derivation of rational authority — a manifestly 
normative notion — thus fully ex plains the logic of his argument, which as we shall see (in §10.3) provides 
strong grounds for preferring an unambiguously normative interpretation of that argument to the recently 
fashionable causal and computational alternatives.  
10.2  The Role and Natur e of the Uniformity Principle  
Before moving on to this larger topic, however, let us consider the role of the Uniformity Principle within the 
argument, a question which has been debated by commentators in terms of what kind of ‗presupposition‘ for 
inductio n Hume takes the principle to provide. The discussion above provides a clear, though partial, answer: 
induction ‗presupposes‘ the Uniformity Principle in the sense that any rational authority which inductive 
inferences have must be derived from that princi ple — in other words, inductive inferences can be rationally 
founded only if the Uniformity Principle is itself rationally founded . This answer, however, leaves 
undetermined both what Hume understands by rational foundedness, and also what account he might  give of 
the supposed dependence of induction on the Uniformity Principle.  
Historically by far the most popular account of these matters is that Hume operates with a deductivist 
conception of Reason, and accordingly takes the Uniformity Principle to be pre supposed by inductive 
inferences in the sense of its being an implicit premiss which is required to transform them into deductions. As 
Stove puts it: ‗Inductive arguments are all invalid as they stand, and it would be necessary, in order to turn 
them into valid arguments, to add to their premisses a proposition which asserts that unobserved instances 
resemble observed ones.‘62 The central thrust of Hume‘s argument, on this account, is that the non -provability 
of the Uniformity Principle — and hence the non -availability of this essential implicit premiss — exposes any 
inductive inference as ‗a  broken -backed syllogism, crippled for lack of a suitable middle term‘.63 
Despite its popularity with commentators, however, this account has little to recommend it. First , it is 
questionable whether Hume sees the Uniformity Principle as functioning as a missing premiss  of inductive 
reasoning — in the Treatise , not only does he deny that it typically plays any relevant psychological role:  
 the understanding or imagination c an draw inferences from past experience, without reflecting on [the Uniformity 
Principle]; much more without forming any principle concerning it, or reasoning upon that principle ( T 104) 
                                                      
62 Stove, Prob ability and Hume’s Inductive Scepticism , 43. 
63 Flew, Hume’s Philosophy of Belief , 81. No factual inference to the 
unobserved has authority 
derived from Reason: 
¬FO(f,R)  All factual inferences to the 
unobserved derive whatever 
authority they possess from the 
Uniformity Principle (UP): 
FO(f,u)  
UP doe s not have authority 
derived from Reason: 
¬FO(u,R)  
  138 but also, he seems to deny that this lack is inferentially problemati c: 
 we may exert our reason without employing more than two ideas, and without having recourse to a third to serve as a 
medium betwixt them. We infer a cause immediately from its effect; and this inference is not only a true species of 
reasoning, but the s trongest of all others, and more convincing than when we interpose another idea to connect the 
two extremes. ( T 96‡n.)  
Secondly, even if Hume does indeed see the Uniformity Principle as an implicit ‗medium‘ connecting the 
observational premiss of an induct ive inference with its conclusion,64 this does not in the least imply that the 
resulting connection must be deductive , for as we saw in §2 above, the Lockean ‗logic‘ that Hume inherited 
employed the notion of a ‗medium‘ or ‗proof‘ as much within ‗probable‘ as within ‗demonstrative‘ reasoning.65 
Thirdly, the Uniformity Principle as Hume presents it in the Enquiry  (quoted in §3.2 above) is anyway far too 
vague to serve as a plausible deductive  link between the premisses and conclusion of an inductive inference.66 
Fourthly, it seems extremely unlikely that Hume intended the principle to provide any such deductive (and 
hence infallible) connexion, for he clearly recognizes that inductions are incurably fallible even on the 
supposition that nature is uniform , since we can never be certain that we have taken all relevant causal factors 
into account (e.g. T 175, E 86–7). Finally, as we shall see below (in §10.3), there are strong independent 
grounds for denying that Hume employs a deductivist concept of Reason within h is famous argument, since in 
one of its main stages (propositions (13) and (16) in the structure diagram) he explicitly canvasses the 
possibility of a ‗probable‘ argument for the Uniformity Principle.  
Perhaps the best way to approach an alternative account  of the role of the Uniformity Principle is to ask 
ourselves the very question to which Hume takes that principle to be the answer: what exactly is being 
‗presupposed‘ by someone who performs a factual inference from observed to unobserved? One modest and 
presumably fairly uncontroversial answer to this question is as follows: when we inductively extrapolate from 
observed to unobserved (for brevity, from ‗past‘ to ‗future‘), we are pr esupposing that past instances are 
evidentially relevant  to future instanc es, or in other words, that the nature of past instances gives some 
evidence concerning the nature of future instances. This is not all, however, for we also suppose that the 
evidence provided by past instances is positively  relevant, in that future instan ces are likely to resemble  past 
instances rather than, for example, contrasting with them. Hence any inductive inference takes for granted that 
past instances have a positive evidential relevance  to future i nstances. This presupposition can very naturally,  
though loosely, be expressed by saying that future instances can be expected to resemble past instances  
(cf. T 89), that the future will be conformable to the past  (E 35), that the past is a rule for the future  (cf. E 38), 
and so on. I suggest, therefore,  the following interpretation: when Hume claims that inductive inferences are 
founded on the Uniformity Principle, he is simply making the straightforward point that any inductive 
argument, by its very nature , treats past instances as positively evidential ly relevant  to future instances. This 
                                                      
64 Although Flew (ibid.  70–1) takes Hume to be speaking of the Uniformity Principle as providing such a ‗medium‘, in fact 
Hume uses the term only in the context of demandi ng an argument for the Uniformity Principle based on past experience 
(E 34, 37). 
65 As further corroboration, Locke uses the term ‗probable Mediums ‘ at Essay  IV. xvii. 16, and at D 143 Hume speaks of 
‗mediums‘ that ‗reach no farther .  . . than experience [r evised at one stage to ―moral evidence‖] and probability‘. The tendency 
of commentators to jump to a deductivist interpretation of Hume‘s argument simply because they take the Uniformity Principle 
to be functioning as an unavailable ‗medium‘ is thus seriou sly anachronistic given the 18th -century background of Lockean 
‗logic‘ — if anything it reveals their own deductivist prejudices (presumably inherited from Aristotle via Frege) rather than 
Hume‘s.  
66 The more explicit principle of the Treatise  (quoted in th e next footnote) might seem to be capable of providing such a link, but 
only if it were so specific as to be clearly false in general, given that (as Hume recognized) inductions are incurably falli ble.  139 interpretation makes good sense of Hume‘s claim and the various ways in which he expresses it, explains why 
he thought it too obvious to require further elaboration, and also neatly reconciles his denial of the Uniform ity 
Principle‘s conscious psychological role ( T 104, quoted above) with his claim that it nevertheless represents ‗a 
step taken by the mind .  . . in all reasonings from experience‘ ( E 41).67 The Uniformity Principle functions 
within inductive inference not so much as a propositional premiss (whether implicit or explicit), but rather as 
the underlying rationale of any such inference, a principle whose adoption we manifest  every time we treat the 
past as positive evidence regarding the future.68 
10.3  The Logic  of ‘Reason’ in Hume’s Argument  
We are now at last in a position to address and, I hope, to settle conclusively what is perhaps the most 
important interpretative controversy surrounding Hume‘s argument concerning induction: what does Hume 
mean by ‗reason‘ within that argument, and in particular within its celebrated conclusion that induction ‗is not 
founded on reason‘? It will come as no surprise that I take Hume to be employing here the traditional 
perceptual notion of Reason, and accordingly interpret his  conclusion as essentially a denial that induction is 
based on any form of rational perception , whether direct or mediated by inference. The most obvious evidence 
in favour of this interpretation is simply the contemporary dominance of this perceptual noti on (as  sketched in 
§2 above) together with the appropriateness of Hume‘s argument as a means of undermining it — for example 
his emphasis on the impossibility of ‗seeing‘ the effect within the cause (§4.1), and his conclusion that 
induction is founded on t he instinctive operation of custom rather than on any perceptible rational connexion 
(§8). Another significant virtue of this interpretation is to explain why Hume should have singled out induction  
in particular for this type of sceptical treatment. He was  well aware that a Cartesian challenge could be 
mounted against intuition, demonstration, and sensation ( E 149–50, 152 –4), and that the impossibility of a 
non-circular justification of our faculties is by no means peculiar to induction. His special interes t in induction, 
I suggest, is accounted for by his feeling able to prove conclusively of it alone — and without recourse to any 
                                                      
67 The Treatise  is less committal about whether the Uni formity Principle is typically involved at all in inductive inference, 
stating only that ‗ If reason determin‘d us‘ to make such inferences, then ‗it wou‘d proceed upon that principle‘ ( T 89, my 
emphasis). I  suggest that this is because Hume here views the principle as being an explicit proposition ‗that instances, of which 
we have had no experience, must resemble those, of which we have had experience, and that the course of nature continues 
always uniformly the same‘ ( T 89) — a proposition which he rightly  takes to play no conscious role within most inductive 
inference. His more subtle approach in the Enquiry , which treats the presumption of uniformity as a relatively vague evidential 
principle whose adoption is manifested  in our inferential practice (rathe r than as an explicit proposition which may or may not be 
consciously contemplated) fits nicely with his discussion of the idea of necessity, which even in the Treatise  he had accounted 
for in an almost exactly corresponding way (as presaged by his suggest ion at T 88 that ‗the necessary connexion depends on the 
inference‘).  
68 This interpretation also removes what can seem an inconsistency in Hume‘s thought, by distinguishing between the 
Uniformity Principle (which cannot  itself be founded on experience, on pain of circularity) and the superficially similar principle 
that ‗the same cause always produces the same effect‘, which Hume says ‗we derive from experience‘ and can then use as a 
basis for drawing a general conclusion even from a single, carefully contr olled experiment ( T 173–4; cf. T 104–5, 131, 
E 107‡n.). The latter principle is concerned with the consistency  of events within our experience rather than the evidential 
relevance  of observed to unobserved. But without the presupposition of evidential rele vance, such consistency could not of 
course be extrapolated from past to future.   140 extreme Cartesian scepticism about our faculties in general — that it is utterly beyond the reach of any form of 
perceptual  justification.69 
Although these considerations show that Hume‘s argument makes good sense interpreted as an assault on 
the Lockean perceptual view of ‗probable‘ Reason, they do not by themselves rule out alternative 
interpretations. What I now intend to show is  that the structure and logic of Hume‘s argument, as examined 
above, are seriously inconsistent with the various alternative interpretations that have hitherto been proposed. 
The most prominent of these alternatives are: ( a) the ‗deductivist‘ interpretatio n most strongly advocated by 
Flew and Stove, according to which Hume‘s argument is intended to show that induction cannot yield the 
absolute certainty characteristic of deductive Reason; ( b) the ‗anti -deductivist‘ account of Beauchamp et al., 
Arnold, and B aier, which sees the argument as following a similar logic but with the intention of undermining 
that deductivist concept of Reason rather than endorsing it; and ( c) the ‗no argument‘ interpretation of Garrett 
and Noonan, which takes the argument to be den ying that our use of the method of inductive inference is 
caused by any higher -level reasoning  (i.e. argument or ratiocination) about that method.70 All of these imply 
that Hume‘s denial of a rational foundation for induction is in some way limited — in the  case of ( a) and ( b), 
by restricting attention to forms of evidence that yield absolute certainty, and in the case of ( c), by focusing 
only on forms of evidence that involve inference. Hence all of them fail to provide a full account of the 
structure of th at part of Hume‘s argument which was explored in §§6 and 7 above, and represented in §10 by 
the formula:  
(f3) ¬FO(u,s) & ¬FO(u,i) & ¬FO(u,d) & ¬FO(u,f) → ¬FO(u,R)  
As this formula indicates and as we saw in detail earlier, when Hume discusses the rational c redentials of the 
Uniformity Principle he in turn rules out four potential sources of evidence: sensation, intuition, demonstration, 
and factual inference. The first two of these are directly perceptual rather than inferential (and should therefore 
be irre levant to his purposes if the ‗no argument‘ interpretation were correct), while the last of them cannot 
yield absolute certainty (and should therefore be irrelevant if either the ‗deductivist‘ or the ‗anti -deductivist‘ 
interpretation were correct). Defende rs of these interpretations might be tempted to dismiss this sort of 
objection by alleging carelessness or superfluity in Hume‘s discussion, but a significant passage from A Letter 
from a Gentleman to his Friend in Edinburgh , written by Hume in exactly the  period when he was working on 
the Enquiry , strongly indicates that on the contrary, his selection of these four potential sources of evidence is 
entirely deliberate: ‗It is common for Philosophers to distinguish the Kinds of Evidence into intuitive, 
                                                      
69 In the Treatise  (IV. i. 1 and IV. i. 2 respectively) Hume does apply a somewhat similar sceptical treatment to demonstration and 
sensation, and draws a similar moral, that t hese are based on the instinctive idea -enlivening operations of the imagination rather 
than on rational perception (a point emphasised at  T 265). It is an interesting question whether the moderation of such scepticism 
in the Enquiry  is philosophically or m erely strategically motivated, but certainly his inductive scepticism in the Enquiry  has 
proved to be far more pointed and effective for being dissociated from scepticism about these other, more perceptual, cogniti ve 
operations.  
70 As well as the ‗causal‘ v ariant of this interpretation, emphasized here, there is a ‗computational‘ variant which takes Hume to 
be arguing that our induction inferences are typically immediate and unreflective rather than involving intermediate steps or  
significant ratiocination. Garrett ( Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy ) and Noonan ( Hume on Knowledge ) favour 
the causal variant, Connon (‗The Naturalism of Hume Revisited‘), Broughton (‗Hume‘s Skepticism about Causal Inferences), 
and Owen ( Hume’s Reason ) the computationa l. ‗No argument‘ is potentially a misleading nickname for the interpretation, given 
that in Hume‘s day ‗argument‘ could mean not only ‗process of reasoning‘ but also ‗proof‘, ‗evidence‘, or ‗reason‘ ( Oxford 
English Dictionary ), so when he writes that induc tion is not founded on ‗argument‘, we cannot take for granted that he is using 
the word in its primary modern sense. ‗No ratiocination‘ would be a more precise nickname for what is intended by the 
interpretation‘s proponents.   141 demon strative, sensible, and moral ‘ (L 22). Hume‘s argument is carefully designed to rule out every  potential 
‗kind of evidence‘ for the Uniformity Principle that might be thought to be available on the conventional, 
perceptual view of Reason. And so the kinds of evidence that he considers are not restricted either to those that 
yield absolute certainty, or to those that are inferential.71 For convenient reference, we might therefore 
appropriately call this the ‗no reason whatever‘ interpretation.  
So far I have m ade the case in favour of this interpretation on the basis of what Hume does say in his 
argument, but it can also be pressed strongly on the basis of what he does not  say. To take the ‗deductivist‘ and 
‗anti-deductivist‘ interpretations first, if (as these  interpretations would imply) Hume‘s concern in Enquiry  IV 
were simply to deny that induction can yield absolute deductive certainty, then it would be astonishing that he 
should have overlooked the possibility of proving this concisely and elegantly in alm ost a single step, using his 
argument from distinct conceivability. For given any factual inference to the unobserved, no matter what its 
observational premisses might be, we can always distinctly conceive a change in the course of nature which 
would resul t in the falsehood of its hitherto unobserved conclusion; and this conceivability is by itself more 
than sufficient on Humean principles to rule out immediately any prospect of finding a deductive guarantee for 
such an inference. This simple proof is so ch aracteristically Humean in structure, style, and content (cf. E 35, 
164, D 189) that it surely could not have escaped the great sceptic‘s notice had it been sufficient for his 
purposes. So the fact that he instead develops an argument of considerable sophi stication, in which he takes 
such pains to explore and dismiss in turn a variety of possible sources of inductive warrant including at least 
one (namely ‗probable‘ reasoning) which on deductivist principles is patently worthless, provides compelling 
eviden ce that the conclusion which he seeks goes well beyond the reach of this crude deductivist ‗hole in 
one‘.72 
Turning now to the ‗no argument‘ interpretation, on this account the most surprising omission from 
Hume‘s discussion is any serious consideration of faulty  (e.g. incomplete, question -begging, or simply 
fallacious) arguments on which the Uniformity Principle, and hence our use of induction, might be founded. 
For if, as this interpretation maintains, Hume‘s purpose is purely to deny that we are caused  to reason 
inductively through the influence of some higher -level argument or ratiocination, then to restrict his attention 
here to good  arguments, as though only these could possibly have any causal influence upon us, would seem to 
manifest a most un -Humean rationalist prejudice.73 And indeed it is hard to see why he should presume that 
this causal impact of our belief in the Uniformity Principle (whether mediated by means of a good or a bad 
                                                      
71 Moreover the context of the Letter  does make clear that Hume uses ‗evidence‘ here in its modern sense, as referring to a 
source of epistemic support, for on the same page he talks of an opinion‘s being ‗supported by moral Evidence ‘. Hence I 
disagree with Garrett‘s claim ( Cognition an d Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy , 228) that ‗Hume .  . . consistently uses 
[―evidence‖] to mean ―evidentness‖ — that is, as equivalent to ―belief‖, ―assurance‖, or ―vivacity‖, construed as properties of 
ideas.‘ This is arguable as an interpretation of that  term in the Treatise , but seems quite wrong in relation to the Enquiry , for 
example Hume‘s use of the term at E 26–7 and throughout Section  X. 
72 In addition to the criticisms presented in this section, I have already extensively attacked (in §10.2) the ‗u navailable deductive 
medium‘ view of the Uniformity Principle which constitutes a central plank of both the ‗deductivist‘ and ‗anti -deductivist‘ 
interpretations as these are usually presented. Hence I shall devote most attention here to the ‗no argument‘ i nterpretation.  
73 Likewise, on what I have called the ‗computational‘ variant of the ‗no argument‘ interpretation, it is hard to understand why  
Hume should restrict his attention to ‗intermediate ideas‘ that are well -founded. The Uniformity Principle can po tentially play 
such a role in ratiocination however it may have come into our minds, so if Hume‘s primary concern in his argument is to deny  
that it (or any other intermediate idea) does so, then his discussion of the possible sources of evidence for it is  largely irrelevant 
except on the extremely un -Humean assumption that we are incapable of having irrational or inferentially unfounded beliefs.   142 argument) should in any way imply that it itself is founded on some further  argument.74 To illustrate these 
points, here are a few higher -level reasonings that might, for all that is said in Hume‘s famous argument, cause  
us either to reason inductively or to accept the Uniformity Principle:  
(1) (I just happen to find myself believing that) the future will resemble the past. But if the future resembles the past, 
then induction can be relied on. Therefore induction can indeed be relied on.  
(2) God has implanted in me a tendency to believe that the future will resemble the past.  God is no deceiver. Therefore 
the future will resemble the past.  
(3) In the past, it has always turned out that hitherto unobserved objects tended to resemble previously observed objects. 
Hence in the future it can be expected that unobserved objects will  resemble observed objects.  
(4) The observed regular behaviour of objects indicates that they have intrinsic essences which necessitate them to 
behave and to appear as they do. Given that such essences exist, it follows that there must be a consistent 
relationship between objects‘ appearances and their behaviour. Hence the relationships observed in the past will 
continue into the future.  
Hume‘s reaction to all of these is entirely predictable, and he would, of course, be quite unimpressed. In the 
first case  he would refuse to accept our belief in uniformity as a bare fact, and would express his ‗sifting 
humour‘ by questioning its foundation ( E 32–3). In the second, he would no doubt criticize the ‗unexpected 
circuit‘ of our reliance on God‘s veracity, perhap s on the grounds that if induction ‗be once called in question, 
we shall be at a loss to find arguments, by which we may prove the existence of that Being or any of his 
attributes.‘ ( E 153). In the third case, he would certainly object to the argument‘s ci rcularity ( E 35–6). In the 
fourth, he would reject our talk of intrinsic necessitating ‗essences‘ as incomprehensible ( A 649, E 73–7) and 
would go on to point out that the extrapolation of objects‘ causal powers into the future, in the context of an 
argume nt for induction, then becomes question -begging ( E 36–8). But on the ‗no argument‘ interpretation, all 
of these predictable responses would be completely beside the point, for although they indeed identify logical 
inadequacies in the proffered arguments,75 they do nothing whatever to prove that such arguments can play no 
causal  role in the explanation of (some, if not all, of) our inductive behaviour. Moreover the author of Treatise  
I. iii. 13 and of Enquiry  VII could hardly fail to appreciate this, for he, of all people, could never suppose it to 
be an a  priori truth that only good arguments can motivate us (cf. T 143–7), nor could he consider it 
                                                      
74 Noonan ( Hume on Knowledge ) tries to fill the resulting hole in what he takes to be Hume‘s argument as follows:  ‗We could 
not be caused to engage in the practice of inductive inference by our acceptance of an argument, a premiss of which was the 
Uniformity Principle, unless we also had available an argument for the Uniformity Principle (for we could not believe in the 
Uniformity Principle, antecedently to acquiring a disposition to engage in inductive inference, except on the basis of argume nt).‘ 
(pp. 119–20). Suffice it to say that on Humean principles, both of Noonan‘s ‗could not‘ claims seem to be entirely gratui tous.  
75 That Hume has his eye set firmly on questions of rational warrant rather than causal explanation, even in the Treatise , is 
particularly clear in his response to (4) above, in what I have called (in §9) the ‗coda‘ to his argument. There, at T 90–1, he 
speaks for example of ‗solid‘ and ‗weak‘ reasoning, discusses whether one proposition ‗can‘ (or ‗can never‘) ‗prove‘ another,  
and gives the fact that ‗the foregoing reasoning had no just foundation‘ as a decisive ground for concluding that the reasoni ng in 
question cannot constitute a basis in Reason for our inductive inferences.   143 appropriate to investigate any issue of psychological causation through abstract discussion of arguments‘ 
merits rather than concrete empirical observation (cf.  E 67–9).76 
A related objection to the logic of the ‗no argument‘ interpretation can be developed by reference to the 
discussion of Hume‘s ‗founded on‘ relation in §10.1 above. Here the two most relevant formul ae are these:  
(f1)  FO(f,e) & FO(e,u) → FO(f,u)  
(f4)  FO(f,u) & ¬FO(u,R) → ¬FO(f,R)  
On the ‗no argument‘ interpretation, the ‗founded on‘ relation is supposed to involve causation rather than the 
derivation of rational authority, so ‗ FO(f,e) ‘ is presumably  to be read as ‗Factual inference to the 
unobserved is caused by reasoning from experience‘.77 However an abstraction such as the Uniformity 
Principle is not the sort of thing that can have direct causal influence, so if ‗founded on‘ is to be understood in 
this way, it follows that ‗ u‘ cannot be taken as standing for the Uniformity Principle itself, but must instead 
mean something like reasoning that invokes the Uniformity Principle . Translating accordingly, the causal 
variant of formula (f1)  turns out like this: 
 (f1c)   If factual inference to the unobserved is caused by reasoning from experience, and reasoning from 
experience is caused by reasoning that invokes the Uniformity Principle, then factual inference to the 
unobserved is caused by reasoning that in vokes the Uniformity Principle.  
This might seem satisfactory, because the transitivity which is characteristic of causal relations makes (f1c)  
plausibly true (and the corresponding variant of formula (f2)  is equally unproblematic). But moving on now 
to for mula (f4) , we must find a way of rendering ‗ ¬FO(u,R) ‘ and ‗¬FO(f,R) ‘ in causal terms. The latter 
is the ultimate conclusion of Hume‘s famous argument, and so consistency with the ‗no argument‘ 
interpretation requires us to interpret these expressions as de nials that the form of reasoning in question 
(respectively reasoning that invokes the Uniformity Principle, and factual inference to the unobserved) is itself 
caused by (further) reasoning. Hence we reach:  
 (f4c)   If factual inference to the unobserved is caused by reasoning that invokes the Uniformity Principle, 
and reasoning that invokes the Uniformity Principle is not caused by (further) reasoning, then factual 
inference to the unobserved is not caused by (further) reasoning.  
However (f4c)  is logically q uite inadequate to play its required role. First, it does nothing to solve the 
‗puzzle‘ mentioned in §10.1, for it provides no apparent explanation of why the form of conditional:  
                                                      
76 Hume‘s discussions of induction do admittedly include what would be on this interpretation two highly appropriate empirical 
observations. First, at T 103–4 (cf. E 54), where h e remarks that we characteristically draw inductive conclusions immediately 
and unreflectively, even in cases where we have never before reflected on the relevant uniformity. And secondly, at E 39 (in 
what §9.3 above calls his ‗parting shot‘), where he poi nts out that infants and animals universally make use of inductive 
prediction even though they are clearly in no position to understand, let alone to frame for themselves, higher -level arguments 
about it (cf. also T 178, E 106). In both cases these observa tions follow the statement of his famous argument, and he draws the 
moral that they corroborate the conclusion of that argument, but there is no sign that he views them as constituting essentia l, or 
even significant, parts of it.  
77 Here again I focus on th e causal variant of the ‗no argument‘ interpretation. The computational variant has even more trouble 
with the logic of Hume‘s argument, and indeed seems to be able to make sense of the ‗founded on‘ relation only in conditional  
terms, so that ‗ FO(f,e) ‘, for example, is rendered as something like ‗ if factual inference to the unobserved were to involve 
intermediate reasoning, then this would be reasoning from experience‘. Not only is this extremely artificial, and without any 
obvious basis in the text of the Enquiry , but also it completely fails to explain the logic behind either  (f1)  or (f4) .  144    FO(x,y) & ¬FO(y,z) → ¬FO(x,z)  
which cannot in general be valid on Humean terms, should be thought acceptable in this instance. Secondly, it 
can seriously be questioned whether (f4c)  as stated actually provides a legitimate instantiation of this (at 
least superficially  plausible) form, because in the two propositions ‗reasoning that invokes the Uniformity 
Principle is not caused by (further) reasoning‘ and ‗factual inference to the unobserved is not caused by 
(further) reasoning‘, the phrase ‗(further) re asoning‘ evidently refers to something different — in the former 
case it means further reasoning beyond that which invokes the Uniformity Principle , and in the latter it means 
further reasoning beyond the factual inference to the unobserved . Thirdly, and d isastrously for the ‗no 
argument‘ interpretation, the result of this equivocation is to make (f4c)  not only invalid, but almost 
self-refuting. For if factual inference to the unobserved is caused by reasoning that invokes the Uniformity 
Principle, then it immediately follows that factual inference to the unobserved is indeed caused by ‗(further) 
reasoning‘ — namely, that very reasoning which invokes the Uniformity Principle!78 
The upshot of all this is that the structure of Hume‘s argument concerning inducti on is no more 
comprehensible on the ‗no argument‘ interpretation than it is on the ‗deductivist‘ and ‗anti -deductivist‘ 
interpretations. The latter are unable to explain why Hume‘s reasoning is so complex, and in particular, why he 
takes the trouble even t o consider the possibility of a ‗probable‘ foundation for the Uniformity Principle. But 
on the ‗no argument‘ interpretation a great deal of Hume‘s discussion, including even his overall strategy of 
throwing light on inductive reasoning by examining its fou ndation through the Uniformity Principle, turns out 
to be not only irrelevant but also seriously fallacious. Given this damning verdict, it might naturally be 
wondered at this point whether my discussion of these rival interpretations has been somehow unfa ir or 
incomplete, overlooking some alternative way of understanding Hume‘s language which would make good 
sense of everything he says in the appropriate terms. To address this possibility I can think of no better 
response than a Humean challenge: if anyone  claims that there is some consistent and plausible way of 
understanding the logic of Hume‘s argument in deductivist, anti -deductivist, causal, or computational terms, 
then let them spell out its logic in detail, making clear how the ‗founded on‘ relation is to be understood, what 
logical properties (e.g.  transitivity, asymmetry) this relation has, and how the structure of Hume‘s argument, 
represented by the diagram in the appendix and/or formulae (f1)  to (f4) , can be made sense of in those 
terms. I hope I have proved that the interpretation presented here, which understands the ‗founded on‘ relation 
in terms of the derivation of rational authority, and Reason as a supposed faculty that perceives evidential 
connexions (whether sensory, intuitive, demonstrati ve, or ‗probable‘), is fully able to meet this challenge. But I 
am not aware of any other interpretation that even comes close to doing so.  
11. The Nature of Hume’s Inductive Scepticism  
It is clear that Hume saw the conclusion of his argument concerning in duction as a sceptical result. The very 
title of Section  IV, ‗Sceptical Doubts concerning the Operations of the Understanding‘ strongly suggests this, 
and he then confirms it by providing an unambiguously ‗negative answer‘ ( E 32) to the doubts that he ther e 
raises (at E 158 he also refers back to the argument as presenting ‗sceptical objections to moral  evidence‘). 
Moreover if my analysis of the argument‘s logic is correct, it proceeds by undermining every possible source 
of rational evidential authority fo r the Uniformity Principle, a principle which is itself presented as being the 
                                                      
78 Note that there is no way round this problem by somehow trying to identify the two types of reasoning (e.g. by deeming that 
factual inference to the unobserved itself indirectly invokes the Uniformity Principle). For quite apart from any logical 
difficulties that would then arise elsewhere, the two relata of the ‗founded on‘ relation must clearly be distinct if it is s upposed to 
be interpreted in causal terms.   145 only potential source of such authority for inductive inferences. Hence it is no surprise to find Hume 
expressing his conclusion in words that are entirely consonant with the ‗n o reason whatever‘ interpretation that 
I have advocated:79 
I say then, that, even after we have experience of the operations of cause and effect, our conclusions from that 
experience are not founded on reasoning, or any process of the understan ding. ( E 32) 
 . . . in all reasonings from experience, there is a step taken by the mind, which is not supported by any argument or 
process of the understanding .  . . (E 41) 
. . . we cannot give a satisfactory reason, why we believe, after a thousand experiments, that a stone will fall, or fire 
burn .  . . (E 162) 
Similar statements occur in the Treatise , including most emphatically:80 
Let men be once fully perswaded of these two principles, That there is nothing in any object, consider’d in itself, 
which can afford us a reason for drawing a conclusion beyond it;  and, That even after the observation of the 
frequent or constant conjunction of objects, we have no reason to draw any inference concerning any object beyond 
those of which we have had experience;  I say, let men b e once fully convinc‘d of these two principles, and this will 
throw them so loose from all common systems, that they will make no difficulty of receiving any, which may appear 
the most extraordinary. ( T 139) 
Here Hume stresses that the negative conclusion of his famous argument, that ‗we have no reason to draw any 
[inductive] inference‘, is sufficiently striking to ‗throw men loose from all common systems‘. So he clearly 
cannot have understood this conclusion as being only a relatively modest result, such a s a denial of the claim 
that induction has deductive warrant, or a denial that our use of induction is caused by higher -level argument. 
Neither of these claims was any part of the established Lockean orthodoxy, which as we have seen (in §2 
above) fully ack nowledged the fallibility of ‗probable‘ reasoning,81 and attributed our judgements of 
probability to the perception of probable connexions rather than to higher -level ratiocination.82 So to make 
                                                      
79 Note th at Hume‘s sceptical conclusion is not confined to the general practice of induction, but applies, as these quotations 
make clear, to each individual inductive inference. Hence it must be read as meaning that every such inference  lacks a 
‗foundation‘ or ‗su pport‘ in Reason or the understanding, which tells strongly against the ‗no argument‘ interpretation given that 
Hume repeatedly stresses the role of explicit ratiocination  in many, or even most, such inferences ( T 133, 175, E 86–7, 107‡n.). 
He sees all inductive inferences as lacking a foundation in Reason , but only some  as being immediate, unreflective, and 
independent of reasoning . 
80 See also T 91: ‗not only our reason fails us in the discovery of the ultimate connection  of causes and effects, but even af ter 
experience has inform‘d us of their constant conjunction , ‘tis impossible for us to satisfy ourselves by our reason, why we 
shou‘d extend that experience beyond those particular instances, which have fallen under our observation‘. Both this and the 
passage from T 139 (also A 652, 655 –6) bear out Stove‘s claim ( Probability and Hume’s Inductive Scepticism , 32, 58 –9) that 
Hume‘s conclusion about factual inferences from  experience is intended to echo his conclusion about factual inferences prior to  
experien ce (i.e.  inferences that are ‗a  priori‘ in the Humean sense discussed in §4.1 above). The latter is clearly a sceptical  
conclusion, and this gives further grounds for taking the former to be sceptical also. In the Enquiry  a similar echo occurs 
implicitly i n the quotation above from E 32, and also between the two paragraphs at E 42. 
81 See also Essay  IV. xv. 2 for Locke‘s clear recognition of the fallibility of probable reasoning, and Essay  IV. iii. 9–17, 21 –9, and 
IV. vi. 7–16 for his views on the very narro w limits of certain ‗knowledge‘.  
82 The idea that our practice of induction might be founded on higher -level reasoning also seems profoundly un -Lockean in 
spirit, given his view of Reason in general as having a God -given ‗native Faculty‘ to perceive evident ial connexions directly and 
thus avoid any dependence on meta -inferential formal rules ( Essay  IV. xvii. 4).  146 sense of his own assessment of it, Hume‘s conclusion must be si gnificantly more radical than what is attributed 
to him by either the ‗anti -deductivist‘ or the ‗no argument‘ interpretation.  
However at the other extreme, if the conclusion of his famous argument is to be at all consistent with his 
other discussions of in ductive reasoning, that conclusion cannot be quite as radical as the ‗deductivist‘ 
interpretation maintains. For deductivism would have the implication that all factual inferences to the 
unobserved are completely worthless, or, in Stroud‘s memorable phrase , that ‗as far as the competition for 
degrees of reasonableness is concerned, all possible beliefs about the unobserved are tied for last place‘.83 And 
this would obviously make a nonsense of Hume‘s efforts, in both the Treatise  and the Enquiry , to develop a 
theory of scientific reasoning whose whole point is to distinguish between good and bad inductive inferences. 
Focusing here on the Enquiry ,84 perhaps the clearest denial of undiscriminating inductive scepticism comes in 
Section  X, which explicitly relies on the principle that factual inferences can vary in force according to their 
conformity with experience, thus implying that they are not all worthless: ‗One, who in our climate, should 
expect better weather in any week of J UNE than in one of D ECEMBER , wou ld reason justly, and conformably to 
experience .  . . A wise man .  . . proportions his belief to the evidence.‘ ( E 110). Hume goes on to apply this 
general principle to inferences from testimony in particular, and thus erects what becomes the central pilla r of 
his celebrated argument concerning miracles: ‗the evidence, resulting from .  . . testimony, admits of a 
diminution, greater or less, in proportion as the fact is more or less unusual‘ ( E 113). But this argument of 
Section  X is not a special case — indeed much of the Enquiry  can be seen as developing a general and fairly 
systematic theory of how inductive inferences should be made and judged. Some highlights of this theory 
appear at E 86–7 (recommending a search for hidden causes), E 104–5 (on reasoning  from analogy), E 107‡n. 
(giving some hints on experimental method), E 56–9 and 110 –11 (dealing with probability in cases of 
inconsistent experience), and E 136–7 (proposing norms of proportionate inference). Whether these passages 
add up to anything appro aching a comprehensive theory may be debatable, but it cannot seriously be denied 
that Hume in the Enquiry  makes numerous comparative judgements about inductive inferences which are 
clearly inconsistent with thoroughgoing deductivist scepticism.  
What kind of scepticism is it, then, that on the one hand denies that we have any reason whatever , or any 
kind of evidence , to ground our reliance on induction, but on the other hand proposes a theory of inductive 
inferences which draws normative distinctions among them, and recommends that we rely on them in 
proportion to ‗the evidence‘? An answer emerges if we contrast the Lockean account of induction, which 
Hume rejects, with the alternative that he develops in Enquiry  V, his so -called ‗Sceptical Solution‘ to his earlier 
‗Sceptical Doubts‘.  
Hume‘s ‗Sceptical Solution‘, as the term implies, ‗solves‘ his problem of the foundation of inductive 
inference, but does so in a way that is consistent with the sceptical conclusion of his argument concerning 
induction. That co nclusion remains entirely intact:  
                                                      
83 B. Stroud, Hume  (London and Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1977), 54.  
84 For a corresponding discussion focusing primarily on the Treatise , see Mi llican, ‗Hume‘s Argument concerning Induction‘, 
128–34. This draws attention to several passages in which Hume clearly implies that ‗probable‘ arguments can vary in force 
(e.g. Treatise  I. iii. 11–12, T 31, 173 –5, 181 –2), and it also outlines his attempt ( Treatise  I. iii. 9–13, T 225–6) to develop a 
systematic theory of factual inference based on ‗general rules‘ and on the distinction within the imagination between those 
principles that are ‗permanent, irresistable, and universal‘ and those that are ‗change able, weak, and irregular‘. Notoriously, 
however, this distinction breaks down in the conclusion of Treatise  Book  I (T 267–8), apparently plunging Hume more deeply 
into scepticism than ever occurs in the Enquiry .  147  in all reasonings from experience, there is a step taken by the mind, which is not supported by any argument or 
process of the understanding ( E 41) 
But the point of Hume‘s ‗solution‘ is to deny that this negative result w ill, or should, have any effect on our 
tendency to infer inductively, because the crucial ‗step taken by the mind‘ whose foundation it questions — the 
assumption of uniformity between past and future — is one that we cannot help making:  
 If the mind be not  engaged by argument to make this step, it must be induced by some other principle of equal 
weight and authority .  . . (E 41) 
 This principle is C USTOM  or H ABIT. . . . By employing that word, we pretend not to have given the ultimate reason of 
such a prope nsity. We only point out a principle of human nature, which is universally acknowledged, and which is 
well known by its effects. Perhaps, we can push our enquiries no farther, or pretend to give the cause of this cause; 
but must rest contented with it as t he ultimate principle, which we can assign, of all our conclusions from experience. 
(E 43) 
 [Belief arising from inference through custom] is the necessary result of placing the mind in such circumstances. It is 
an operation of the soul, when we are so sit uated, as unavoidable as to feel the passion of love, when we receive 
benefits; or hatred, when we meet with injuries. All these operations are a species of natural instincts, which no 
reasoning or process of the thought or understanding is able, either to  produce, or to prevent. ( E 46–7) 
Thus inductive inference has after all a foundation of sorts, though clearly not of the kind that Hume had 
previously been seeking. For although ‗custom‘ is explicitly described here as a source of ‗authority‘ 
(corroborati ng the interpretation of the foundational relation developed in §10.1 above), this is obviously 
nothing like the rational  authority that Locke had purported to find in the perception of objective probable 
connexions. Quite the contrary, for Hume‘s theory i mplies a Copernican reversal of this explanatory order: 
inductive evidential connexions, so far from being ‗read off the world‘ as Locke had implied, turn out instead 
to be ‗read into it‘ (in the guise of causal relations) by our entirely non -rational assu mption of inductive 
uniformity. In terms of the traditional theory of perceptual Reason, this reversal is therefore profoundly  
sceptical.85 Nevertheless it need not mean that as far as factual inference is concerned, ‗anything goes‘ — that 
any such inferenc e is as good (or as bad) as any other. For as Hume forcefully demonstrates in the remainder of 
the Enquiry , the universality and irresistibility of this new foundation for induction enables such 
undiscriminating scepticism to be very effectively opposed th rough an insistence on what Noxon calls 
‗methodological consistency‘.86 Thus, for example, the superstitious theist may appeal to a reported miracle to 
ground his faith, but the very same  inductive principles that underlie his confidence in the truth of the  miracle 
report can be shown to tell more strongly in the opposite direction. When fully informed and faced with the 
balance of empirical evidence, therefore, his beliefs will be pressured to change through the force of custom 
operating within him. Perhaps  neither the rationalist nor the undiscriminating sceptic will initially be impressed 
with this kind of ad hominem  appeal to an admittedly non -rational and potentially deceitful instinct.87 But since 
                                                      
85 Hume‘s Copernican revolution, though less  celebrated, is epistemologically far more radical than Kant‘s later version, because 
of its non-rational  basis. So far from being sceptical, Kant used this sort of explanatory reversal to try to rescue  a priori 
knowledge of matters of fact from the Humean  critique, by appeal to a supposed a  priori knowledge of our own minds‘ synthetic 
capacities (a  supposition which Hume, quite correctly, would never have allowed, as made clear by E 64–9). Hume may have 
woken Kant from his dogmatic slumbers, but as Bertran d Russell quips, Kant ‗soon invented a soporific which enabled him to 
sleep again‘ ( A History of Western Philosophy  (London: George Allen & Unwin, 1946), 731).  
86 J. Noxon, Hume’s Philosophical Development  (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973), 180 –7. 
87 ‗. . . nothing leads us to [inductive] inference but custom or a certain instinct of our nature; which it is indeed difficult to resis t, 
but which, like other instincts, may be fallacious and deceitful‘ ( E 159).   148 they too, just like the theist, are irresistibly governed  by this instinct (whether they like it or not), their own 
inferential tendencies can likewise be harnessed to persuade them in the direction of sound empirical science. 
Many, no doubt, will resist such a following through of the consequences of inductive thinking, perhaps by 
refusing to listen to the evidence proposed or to examine its full implications. Others may be intellectually 
incapable of the kind of careful analysis involved, which may require ‗that nice distinctions be made, just 
conclusions drawn , distant comparisons formed, complicated relations examined, and general facts fixed and 
ascertained‘ ( E 173).88 But such refusal or incapacity is unambiguously a failing of rationality , thus providing 
an entirely appropriate basis for normative judgement.  So Hume is fully justified in drawing a distinction 
between ‗the wise‘ and ‗the vulgar‘ on this basis, between those who systematically pursue the consequences 
of our irresistible assumption of uniformity, and those who do not. The Enquiry  shows how such a systematic 
pursuit involves searching for hidden causes, careful design of experiments, disciplined reasoning from 
analogy and probability, and so forth. All this effectively vindicates the methods of Humean empirical science, 
by demonstrating that they are ‗nothing but the reflections of common life, methodized and corrected‘ ( E 162).  
Philo in the Dialogues  sums up nicely how Hume‘s view of induction, as founded on non -rational custom, 
can be comfortably combined with a healthy respect for systematic emp irical science:  
 To whatever length any one may push his speculative principles of scepticism, he must act, I own, and live, and 
converse like other men; and for this conduct he is not obliged to give any other reason than the absolute necessity 
he lies un der of so doing. If he ever carries his speculations farther than this necessity constrains him, and 
philosophises, either on natural or moral subjects, he is allured by a certain pleasure and satisfaction, which he finds 
in employing himself after that ma nner. He considers besides, that every one, even in common life, is constrained to 
have more or less of this philosophy; that from our earliest infancy we make continual advances in forming more 
general principles of conduct and reasoning; that the larger experience we acquire, and the stronger reason we are 
endowed with, we always render our principles the more ge neral and comprehensive; and that what we call 
philosophy  is nothing but a more regular and methodical operation of the same kind. To philosophis e upon such 
subjects is nothing essentially different from reasoning on common life; and we may only expect greater stability, if 
not greater truth, from our philosophy, on account of its exacter and more scrupulous method of proceeding. ( D 134) 
12. Hume’s  Reinterpretation of ‘Reason’  
We have now seen that there is a sense in which Hume is genuinely sceptical about induction, and another 
sense in which he is not. We can very crudely encapsulate the sceptical and non -sceptical aspects of his 
position, each w ithin a single sentence, as follows:  
 We can see no reason whatever  for supposing that the past gives any evidence at all regarding what will happen in 
the future, and hence no reason whatever  why induction should be a reliable method of inference.  
 We can not help taking for granted that the past is a reliable guide to the future and making inferences on that basis, 
and there is no other method of factual inference which has this irresistibility; hence we should treat induction as our 
norm of factual reason ing. 
The first of these uses the idiom of the perceptual view of Reason, and aims to express Hume‘s ‗sceptical 
doubts‘ concerning the operations of that faculty as thus conceived. But the second suggests a very different, 
                                                      
88 In this quotation from the Enquiry concerning the P rinciples of Morals  Hume is expressing how Reason enters into moral  
rather than inductive decisions, but there is a great similarity between his views in these two fields, as indicated by the l ong 
quotation from the Dialogues  below. Both involve building o n fundamental principles which are themselves non -rational, 
although the working out of their consequences is nevertheless answerable to Reason.   149 naturalistic, view of human Reason , relieving it of the futile attempt to understand and predict matters of fact 
through pure perceptual insight, and steering it instead in the direction of a relatively modest inductive science. 
Hume himself adopts this latter view in most of his writings,  counting inductive inference as a genuine 
operation of Reason, and even (as we have seen in §11) distinguishing it as the normative criterion by which 
all ‗reasoning concerning matter of fact and existence‘ is to be judged. This can seem paradoxical or co nfused, 
for while in his famous argument he very explicitly denies that induction is founded on Reason, and moreover 
seems to deny that it is itself an operation of Reason,89 elsewhere he very clearly states that inductive causal 
inference is one of Reason‘ s most central operations:  
 The understanding exerts itself after two different ways, as it judges from demonstration or probability .  . . reason is 
nothing but the discovery of [causal] connexion .  . . (T 413–14) 
 . . . reason, in a strict and philosophic al sense, can have an influence on our conduct only after two ways: Either 
when it .  . . informs us of the existence of something .  . . or when it discovers the connexion of causes and effects 
(T 459) 
 . . . reason [is] .  . . sufficient to instruct us in t he pernicious or useful tendency of qualities and actions .  . . Reason 
judges either of matter of fact  or of relations . (E 286–7) 
However this apparent inconsistency is not seriously problematic, and its basis is fairly evident. Hume 
naturally enough begin s by using the word ‗reason‘ in a way that is (so to speak) extensionally  consistent with 
that of his contemporaries as described in §2 above: he means by it the faculty by which we judge of truth and 
falsehood.90 In his argument concerning induction he als o uses the word in a way which is intensionally  
consistent with the usage of his contemporaries, meaning a faculty whose operations are all founded on 
perception . But clearly in the aftermath of that argument, he cannot  continue to use the word in a way th at is 
both extensionally and intensionally consistent with the standard usage. Given his sceptical conclusion, either  
he must relinquish the idea that we have a faculty of Reason capable of factual inference, or he must cease to 
treat Reason as the convent ionally presumed faculty of rational insight. Hume not surprisingly chooses the 
second option, continuing to acknowledge a faculty of Reason that embraces ‗probable‘ inference, but 
                                                      
89 A denial that induction is an operation of Reason is, for example, clearly implicit in two passages from Sect ion V, where 
Hume recapitulates his argument: ‗though he should be convinced, that his understanding has no part in [an inductive inferenc e]‘ 
(E 42); ‗Reason is incapable of any such variation. [i.e. the variation with experience that is characteristic of inductive 
inference]. .  . . All inferences from experience, therefore, are effects of custom, not of reasoning‘ ( E 43). 
90 Though often the word is restricted, by both Hume and his contemporaries, to imply the appropriate  operation of that faculty, 
so in th is sense faulty  reasoning or judgement does not count as deriving from Reason. Don Garrett (‗Ideas, Reason, and 
Skepticism: Replies to my Critics‘, Hume Studies , 24 (1998), 171 –94 especially 186 –7) argues quite persuasively in response to 
two of my earlier  papers (‗Hume‘s Argument concerning Induction‘, and ‗Hume on Reason and Induction: Epistemology or 
Cognitive Science?‘, Hume Studies , 24 (1998), 141 –59) that such normative usage in itself should not be taken to imply any 
ambiguity in the faculty term, so  here I have retreated somewhat from the explicit ‗multiple senses‘ interpretation that I 
previously espoused. (However my critical view of Garrett‘s own interpretation is essentially unchanged, as will be clear in 
particular from §10.3 above.)   150 reinterpreting its nature.91 His notion of Reason therefore remains coextens ional with Locke‘s, but behind this 
façade of similarity hides a philosophical revolution.  
The extent of Hume‘s revolution, though anticipated in Section  IV, does not become fully apparent until 
very nearly the end of the Enquiry . By that stage Section  VII has emphasized the impossibility of aprioristic 
knowledge even of our own minds, and has shown that we have absolutely no conception of necessity or power 
in objects independent of our own inferential tendencies. Section  XII then mobilizes a range of furt her sceptical 
arguments, the most important of which serve to demonstrate both the weakness of our grounds for any claim 
to knowledge of the physical world, and also how little we understand of its nature ( E 151–5). Our belief in 
body, just like our confid ence in induction, turns out to be an irresistible natural instinct with no basis in 
rational insight. But unlike induction, this instinct yields no promise of scientific progress, for the deeper we 
try to go in understanding the nature of matter (e.g. by invoking the popular distinction between primary and 
secondary qualities), the more confusion and absurdity we encounter. Only now can the radical implications of 
Section  IV be fully appreciated. The comfortable idea that the behaviour of matter is somehow  
‗comprehensible‘, inspired by the ‗naturalness‘ of Newtonian physics (cf.  T 111–12), turns out to be an 
illusion. Even the effect of colliding billiard balls, widely supposed to be a paradigm of rational understanding, 
is no more predictable a priori than  any other causal interaction. So in place of the seductive but illusory ideal 
of a science built on perceptual Reason, our only recourse is to Humean Reason, modestly looking for 
correlations in the phenomena without any pretence to ultimate rational insi ght: 
 the utmost effort of human reason is, to reduce the principles, productive of natural phaenomena, to a greater 
simplicity, and to resolve the many particular effects into a few general causes, by means of reasonings from 
analogy, experience, and obse rvation. But as to the causes of these general causes, we should in vain attempt their 
discovery .  . . These ultimate springs and principles are totally shut up from human curiosity and enquiry. Elasticity, 
gravity, cohesion of parts, communication of moti on by impulse; these are probably the ultimate causes and 
principles which we shall ever discover in nature; and we may esteem ourselves sufficiently happy, if, by accurate 
enquiry and reasoning, we can trace up the particular phaenomena to, or near to, th ese general principles. The most 
perfect philosophy of the natural kind only staves off our ignorance a little longer .  . . (E 30–1) 
Hume‘s Reason is inductive  Reason, not because we have any rational ground for expecting induction to be 
reliable, but simp ly because its irresistibility makes it the best we have left once the bogus ideal of perceptual 
insight has been swept away. And so paradoxically, in an age of continuing rationalistic ambition amongst ‗our 
modern metaphysicians‘ ( E 73‡n.), induction‘s gr eatest sceptic becomes also its foremost champion.  
                                                      
91 Not only is the second option preferable given the obvious association of ‗reason‘ and ‗reasoning‘, but also it enables Hume to 
retain the faculty word for honorific purposes, to distinguish the proper conclusions of well -disciplined inductive inference from 
the ‗w himsies and prejudices‘ of the imagination. This motivation is apparent in the footnote at T 117, which distinguishes a 
wide sense of ‗imagination‘ (encompassing all operations that involve the vivacity of ideas) from a narrow sense which exclud es 
demonstr ation and induction on the grounds that they are sufficiently epistemologically respectable to be counted instead among 
the operations of ‗reason‘. See Millican, ‗Hume on Reason and Induction‘, 145 –7, for a discussion of this arguably very 
significant foot note.   151 Appendix:     Hume’s Argument concerning Induction (from Section  IV of the Enquiry concerning Human Understanding)  
 
(1) Only the relation of cause and 
effect can take us bey ond the 
evidence of our memory and senses  
(2) All factual inferences to the 
unobserved are founded on the 
relation of cause and effect  
(6) All factual inferences to the 
unobserved are founded on 
experience  (4) Any effect is quite distinct from 
its cause, and many different effects 
are equally conceivable  
(5) Causal relations cannot be known 
a priori, but can only be discovered 
by experience  (7) All reasonings from experience 
are founded on the Uniformity 
Principle (UP)  
(11) The inference from past 
uniformity to future uniformity is not 
intuitive  (9) UP is not founded on anything 
that we learn through the senses 
about objects‘ ‗secret powers‘  
(10) UP can be founded on Reason 
only if it is founded on experience 
(of uniformity)  (3) Sensory perception of any object 
does not reveal either its causes or its 
effects, and there is no known 
connexion between the sensible 
qualities and its ‗secret  powers‘  (15) Future uniformity cannot be 
inferred demonstratively from 
past uniformity  (14) A change in the course of 
nature can be distinctly 
conceived, and hence is  possible  (13) Two kinds of argument are 
available (for proving UP): 
demonstrative and factual  (8) All factual inferences to the 
unobserved are founded on UP  
(16) If there is a good argument 
for UP, it mu st be a factual 
inference  
(17) Any factual inference to UP 
would be circular  (18) There is no good argument 
of any kind for UP  (20) CONCLUSION  
No factual inference to the 
unobserved is founded on Reason  
(19) UP is not founded on Reason  
(12) UP can be founded on 
Reason only if it is founded on 
argument (via some medium 
enabling it to be inferred from 
past experience of uniformity)   152 Hume’s Own Statement of the Propositions Identified in the Structure Diagram  
(1) By m eans of [ Cause and Effect ] alone can we go beyond the evidence of our memory and senses. ( E 26) 
(2) All reasonings concerning matter of fact seem to be founded on the relation of Cause and Effect . (E 26) 
. . . all arguments concerning existence are founde d on the relation of cause and effect .  . . (E 35) 
. . . all our evidence for any matter of fact, which lies beyond the testimony of sense or memory, is derived entirely 
from the relation of cause and effect .  . . (E 159) 
(3) No object ever discovers, by the qualities which appear to the senses, either the causes which produced it, or the 
effects which will arise from it .  . . (E 27) 
It is allowed on all hands, that there is no known connexion between the sensible qualities and the secret powers .  . . 
(E 33) 
(4) . . . every effect is a distinct event from its cause. It could not, therefore, be discovered in the cause, and .  . . the 
conjunction of it with the cause must appear .  . . arbitrary; since there are always many other e ffects, which, to reason, 
must seem fully as consistent and natural. ( E 30) 
(5) . . . the knowledge of [cause and effect] is not, in any instance, attained by reasonings à priori ; but arises entirely from 
experience .  . . (E 27) 
. . . causes and effects are discoverable, not by reaso n, but by experience  . . . (E 28) 
In vain, therefore, should we pretend to .  . . infer any cause or effect, without the assistance of observ ation and 
experience. ( E 30) 
(6) . . . nor can our reason, unassisted by experience, ever draw any inference concer ning real existence and matter of fact 
. . . (E 27) 
In vain, therefore, should we pretend to determine any single event .  . . without the assistance of obse rvation and 
experience. ( E 30) 
(7) . . . we always presume, when we see like sensible qualities, th at they have like secret powers, and expect, that effects, 
similar to those which we have experienced, will follow from them .  . . (E 33) 
We have said, that .  . . all our experimental conclusions proceed upon the supposition, that the future will be 
confor mable to the past .  . . (E 35) 
. . . all inferences from experience suppose, as their foundation, that the future will resemble the past, and that similar 
powers will be conjoined with similar sensible qualities .  . . (E 37) 
(8) [This proposition is impli cit in the inferential sequence:] We have said, that all arguments concerning existence are 
founded on the relation of cause and effect; that our knowledge of that relation is derived entirely from experience; 
and that all our experimental conclusions proc eed upon the supposition, that the future will be conformable to the 
past. ( E 35) 
(9) . . . the mind is not led to form such a conclusion concerning [sensible qualities and secret powers‘] co nstant and 
regular conjunction, by any thing which it knows of t heir nature .  . . (E 33) 
(10) [This proposition is implicit in Hume‘s transition from considering ‗a  priori‘ evidence for the Uniformity Principle to 
considering experiential arguments for it:] As to past Experience , it can be allowed to give direct  and certain  
information of those precise objects only, and that precise period of time, which fell under its cognizance: but why 
this experience should be extended to future times, and to other objects, which for aught we know, may be only in 
appearance similar ; this is the main question on which I would insist. ( E 33) 
(11) The connexion between these propositions [ I have found that such an object has always been a ttended with such an 
effect  and I foresee, that other objects, which are, in appearance, similar, will be attended with similar effects ] is not 
intuitive. ( E 34) 
(12) There is required a medium, which may enable the mind to draw such an inference, if indeed it be drawn by reasoning 
and argument. ( E 34) 
(13) All reasonings may be divided into two kind s, namely demonstrative reasoning, or that concerning relations of ideas, 
and moral reasoning, or that concerning matter of fact and existence. ( E 35)  153 (14) . . . it implies no contradiction, that the course of nature may change .  . . May I not clearly an d distinctly conceive 
[such a thing]? ( E 35) 
(15) That there are no demonstrative arguments in the case, seems evident .  . . (E 35) 
. . . whatever is intelligible, and can be distinctly conceived, implies no contradiction, and can never be proved false 
by any demonstrative argument or abstract reasoning à priori  . . . (E 35) 
(16) If we be, therefore, engaged by arguments to put trust in past experience, and make it the standard of our future 
judgment, these arguments must be probable only, or such as rega rd matter of fact and real existence .  . . (E 35) 
(17) To endeavour, therefore, the proof [that the future will be conformable to the past] by probable arg uments, or 
arguments regarding existence, must be evidently going in a circle, and taking that for g ranted, which is the very point 
in question. ( E 35–6) 
(18) . . . it may be requisite .  . . to shew, that none of [the branches of human knowledge] can afford such an argument .  . . 
(E 35) 
. . . we have no argument to convince us, that objects, which have,  in our experience, been frequently conjoined, will 
likewise, in other instances, be conjoined in the same manner .  . . (E 159) 
(19) . . . it is not reasoning which engages us to suppose the past resembling the future, and to expect similar effects from 
causes, which are, to appearance, similar .  . . (E 39) 
. . . nothing leads us to [expect constant conjunctions to continue] but custom or a certain instinct of our nature .  . . 
(E 159) 
(20) I say then, that, even after we have experience of the operations of cause and effect, our conclusions from that 
experience are not founded on reasoning, or any process of the understan ding. ( E 32) 
. . . in all reasonings from experience, there is a step taken by the mind, which is not supported by any argument or 
proces s of the understanding. ( E 41) 
All belief of matter of fact or real existence [is due merely to] a species of natural instincts, which no reasoning or 
process of the thought and understanding is able, either to produce, or to prevent. ( E 46–7) 
 