Critical Survey of the Literature on Hume and the  First  Enquiry  
Peter Millican, University of Leeds  
This survey aims to provide useful suggestions for further reading related to the first Enquiry , focused 
especially on the philosophical and scholarly issues disc ussed in this volume, and supplemented by references 
to contemporary works on the same themes. It starts with a short discussion of selected current editions of the 
Enquiry  itself, then of Hume’s other relevant works, before moving on to philosophical and interpretative 
topics, mostly organised according to the sections of the Enquiry  where those topics are addressed, and making 
reference where appropriate to the papers in this volume (reserving the capitalised ‘Chapter’ for this purpose). 
Wherever a topic is not only of scholarly interest, but also of continuing philosophical or scientific relevance, I 
have tried to suggest some useful points of access into the modern literature, so that those whose interest is 
stimulated by the reading of Hume can follow t his through into some of the many fascinating areas of 
contemporary debate.  
Since Beauchamp’s student edition of the Enquiry , referenced in §1a below, already contains a useful and 
reasonably up -to-date annotated bibliography (in its ‘Supplementary Reading ’ section), I have tried as far as 
possible to complement it rather than to overlap.  Hence there is no special section here on historical sources or 
bibliographic materials, nor on introductory surveys of Hume’s thought, nor on general anthologies and 
collections of essays — in all of these areas, my own recommendations (except in the case of the recent general 
collections mentioned in §3a below) would correspond closely with those made by Beauchamp.  Instead, I have 
tried to give more specific advice for st udents or scholars working through the issues discussed in this volume, 
often under pressure of time, and needing to make decisions which more wide -ranging bibliographies typically 
leave open, such as which Hume edition(s) they are best advised to purchase , and which particular articles or 
sections of books will most repay study on each of the various issues (and in which order). To this end I have 
summarised the most salient points of the majority of the items listed (excepting those that are too wide -ranging 
to make this feasible), and these summaries are often quite extensive where this has enabled me to spell out how 
the discussions fit together as parts of a continuing debate, or where the issues are particularly complex. In the 
case of some very recent  items to which appropriate responses have not yet appeared, I have also added some 
personal suggestions regarding promising lines of criticism.  
The whole field of Hume studies is blossoming, with interest in his philosophy stronger than ever and high 
quality contributions appearing every year. This has enabled me to include here many very recent works, whose 
citations can therefore in turn be used to identify further topical material for those with time to move beyond my 
recommendations. Such readers will find some additional suggestions in Beauchamp’s bibliography, which in 
particular lists a number of books that I have omitted not from any adverse judgement on their quality, but 
usually because they are relatively unfocused on the topic in question. Also useful for older references will be 
‘Some Notes on the Hume Literature’ which appears as an appendix to Terence Penelhum’s David Hume: An 
Introduction to His Philosophical System  (see §3b below).  
In the future, I intend to provide updates to this survey th rough the Leeds Electronic Text Centre Hume 
Project website which hosts my electronic edition of the Enquiry  (at www.etext.leeds.ac.uk/hume/ ). This 
site will also give access to freely available electronic copies of some of the works listed here, especiall y where 
these are difficult to obtain (e.g. because they are out of print or in journals of limited circulation). Any authors 
or other copyright holders willing to provide such electronic copies are invited to contact the Electronic Text 
Centre through the  website. Readers will, I hope, find this an increasingly useful resource for gaining 
unrestricted access to some of the best available work on Hume and the Enquiry .  2 1.  Editions of the Enquiry  
1(a)  Printed Editions  
For many years the standard edition of the Enquiry , used for page references in the vast majority of 
philosophical and scholarly works on Hume, has been the edition published by Oxford University Press, 
originally edited by Selby -Bigge and more recently revised by Nidditch:  
 David Hume, Enquiri es concerning Human Understanding and concerning the Principle of Morals  
(1777), ed. L. A. Selby -Bigge, 3rd edn. rev. P.  H. Nidditch (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975)  
The text is based on the 1777 edition, which was the last to contain new authorial correcti ons (Hume having 
died in 1776). However it is far from perfect, containing well over 1,000 small inaccuracies, mostly of 
punctuation. Moreover Selby Bigge’s editorial additions are generally best ignored, with the possible 
exceptions of the annotated index  and the comparative table of contents with the Treatise . In particular, his 
Introduction is dated and totally misrepresents Hume’s intentions, while the ‘section’ numbers which he 
inserted within the text simply invite misunderstanding because they are so  easily confused with page numbers.  
The page numbering of the Selby -Bigge edition will continue to be important for the foreseeable future, 
given the sheer number of books and articles on Hume (including those in the current volume) which use it to 
make re ference to the two Enquiries . Readers of other editions are therefore well advised to write the 
Selby -Bigge page numbers at the relevant points in the margin of whatever edition they use themselves — the 
location of the Selby -Bigge page breaks can be found  not only from the printed edition itself, but also from the 
appropriate version of the Leeds electronic edition of the Enquiry , available freely on the World Wide Web 
from the address www.etext.leeds.ac.uk/hume/  (see §1b below).  
Most printed editions of t he Enquiry  are textually even less accurate than the Selby -Bigge, but a number of 
them have useful editorial notes to supplement the text, such as elucidations of Hume’s terms and explanations 
of his references. Though by now rather dated, the one by Hende l is particularly worthy of mention, because it 
also contains details of the various editions of the Enquiry  that appeared in Hume’s lifetime, together with the 
text of footnotes and other passages that were omitted from the 1777 edition:  
 David Hume, An Inquiry concerning Human Understanding  (1777), ed. Charles W. Hendel (Indianapolis: 
Bobbs -Merrill Educational Publishing, 1955)  
By far the best printed edition of the Enquiry  currently available, however, has only recently appeared in 
the Oxford Philosophic al Texts series:1 
 David Hume, An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding  (1772), ed. Tom L. Beauchamp (Oxford and 
New York: Oxford University Press, 1999)  
Beauchamp’s editorial material is in general first rate. It includes a detailed introduction describi ng the 
background to the Enquiry  and giving an outline of each section, an excellent survey of supplementary reading, 
an extensive and well -organised appendix of annotations to the text, and a useful glossary. The text is also 
highly reliable, though based  on the 1772 edition which is arguably less authoritative than the 1777 preferred by 
most other editors. The main difference between the two is Hume’s deletion from the latter of the majority of 
Section III, which he presumably excised from the edition lef t to posterity because he appreciated its lack of 
                                                      
1 Note that this is Beauchamp’s student  edition of the Enquiry , shortly due to be joined by a Clarendon critical  edition with the same 
editor and based on the same text, which will be of p articular interest to specialist scholars but significantly more expensive.   3 philosophical relevance to the main project of the Enquiry  as a whole. Beauchamp notes the deletion,2 so in this 
respect readers are free to take their choice, but it is perhaps a shame that other significa nt omissions, from 
previous editions of the Enquiry , are not also noted by him (hence the continuing value of Hendel’s edition, 
which does record them). The last and major criticism of Beauchamp’s edition is its lack of Selby -Bigge page 
numbering. No doubt  from a purist point of view the strict paragraph numbering introduced in Beauchamp’s 
edition (as in the other new Oxford editions of Hume’s works) is superior, but the inclusion of Selby -Bigge 
numbers in the margin would have greatly facilitated the usefu lness of this edition for study, given that they 
have for so long been the de facto  standard for references to the Enquiry  in philosophical and scholarly works. 
Again, however, the solution is straightforward, and readers who wish to remedy this omission i n their copy of 
the Beauchamp edition can easily do so by hand.  
1(b)  Electronic Editions  
For students and scholars, the two most obvious potential virtues of electronic texts are cheapness and ease of 
manipulation (the latter including ease of reproductio n, distribution, excerpting, and searching). Many free 
versions of the Enquiry  are available from the World Wide Web, but most are of dubious quality, being based 
on old printed editions that are now in the public domain. There is, however, a highly reliab le version of the 
1777 edition published by the University of Leeds Electronic Text Centre, and made freely available for 
non-profit academic purposes.  
 David Hume, An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding  (1777), ed. Peter Millican (Leeds Electronic 
Text Centre, 2000), from Web address www.etext.leeds.ac.uk/hume/  
This site is the ‘home page’ of a recently established but long -term project devoted to works on, and by, Hume, 
focusing on the publication of high quality texts and bibliographic materials toget her with search and other 
facilities. These facilities include the ability to display the texts in a number of formats, for example 
unpaginated, paginated as in Hume’s original edition, or paginated according to the de facto  standard edition. 
The last of t hese is particularly useful in the current context, since it enables the Selby -Bigge pagination to be 
freely consulted over the Web.  
Currently the best search facilities available for Hume’s works in general are provided by:  
 Complete Works & Correspondenc e of David Hume , CD -ROM in the Past Masters series, published by 
InteLex Corporation, Charlottesville, Virginia (Web address www.nlx.com ) 
The texts used by InteLex are not of high quality (e.g. the Enquiry  is taken from the 1898 Green and Grose 
edition), a nd the CD -ROM is far too expensive for most students, but the search facilities make it invaluable for 
those engaged in serious research on Hume, especially as it includes not only Hume’s philosophical works, but 
also his History of England  and his corresp ondence.  
2.  Hume’s Other Works  
2(a)  A Treatise of Human Nature  
Exactly as with the two Enquiries , the standard edition of the Treatise  has for many years been the Oxford 
University Press edition originally edited by Selby -Bigge, and more recently revised  by Nidditch:  
                                                      
2 In his note on the text (p.  80) Beauchamp calls it ‘a major and unexplained deletion’, thereby perhaps suggesting doubt regarding its 
authority. My own view is that the deletion was entirely judicious, and totally in line with the sort of streamlining outlined in §6 of 
Chapter  1 of this volume on ‘The Context, Aims, and Structure of Hume’s First Enquiry ’.  4  David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature  (1739 –40), ed. L. A. Selby -Bigge, 2nd edn. rev. P.  H. Nidditch 
(Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978)  
As with the Selby -Bigge Enquiries , the text is of reasonable quality but far from perfect, and the annotate d 
index is the most useful of the editorial additions. And again the Selby -Bigge has recently been effectively 
supplanted (for all purposes other than page references) by a far superior new edition in the Oxford 
Philosophical Texts series:  
 David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature  (1739 –40), ed. David Fate Norton and Mary J. Norton (Oxford 
and New York: Oxford University Press, 2000)  
David Norton’s introduction is particularly valuable, providing an excellent outline of this complex and difficult 
work. Other useful editorial material includes a section of comprehensive annotations to the Treatise  and to the 
Abstract  (the text of which is included with the Treatise  in both the editions mentioned here), and a glossary of 
‘potentially puzzling words and phrases’.  Again the major criticism of the new Oxford edition is its lack of 
Selby -Bigge page numbering, but again this can easily be remedied by hand.  
2(b)  An Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals  
Hume’s second Enquiry  is included with the first in the Selb y-Bigge edition discussed in §1a above, but yet 
again the best modern edition is in the Oxford Philosophical Texts series:  
 David Hume, An Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals  (1751), ed. Tom L. Beauchamp (Oxford and 
New York: Oxford University Pres s, 1998)  
This has similar virtues to Beauchamp’s companion edition of the first Enquiry  (see §1a above), and is therefore 
highly recommended.  
2(c)  Dialogues concerning Natural Religion  
For understanding the Enquiry , Hume’s posthumously published Dialogues  have an importance surpassed only 
by the Treatise . They are also the most cleverly constructed and entertaining of all his works, and perhaps the 
funniest truly great work of philosophy ever written by anyone. The standard edition referred to in most arti cles 
and books on Hume is the one edited by Kemp Smith:  
 David Hume, Dialogues concerning Natural Religion  (1779), ed. Norman Kemp Smith, 2nd edn. 
(Edinburgh: Nelson, 1947)  
This edition is particularly highly respected for two reasons. First, Kemp Smith ca refully examined Hume’s 
manuscript (even to the extent of studying the watermarks of the sheets on which it is written), and in his 
edition highlights the important changes that Hume made to the Dialogues  between its original composition (in 
the early 1750 s) and his death in 1776 (when he evidently took great care in preparing it for posthumous 
publication). Secondly, Kemp Smith provides a great deal in addition to Hume’s text, including sections on 
various aspects of Hume’s general views on religion, a sho rt discussion of Sections  X and XI of the Enquiry , a 
famous interpretative essay entitled ‘The Argument of the Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion ’, a detailed 
critical analysis of the argument of the Dialogues , and some further appendices and textual su pplements of 
related historical material. It is a great shame that at the time of writing, this excellent and standard edition 
(though reprinted by Bobbs -Merrill of Indianapolis from 1962 to 1980) is out of print.  
Those seeking a reasonably priced and reli able modern edition of the Dialogues  are probably best advised 
to choose one of the following:   5  David Hume, Dialogues concerning Natural Religion  (1779) and The Natural History of Religion  (1757), 
ed. J. C. A. Gaskin (Oxford and New York: Oxford University  Press, 1993)  
 David Hume, Dialogues concerning Natural Religion  (1779), ed. Martin Bell (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 
1990)  
Gaskin uses Kemp Smith’s text, and also his footnotes which highlight what he took to be Hume’s most 
significant manuscript alterations.  Hence this edition will particularly appeal to those with interest in these 
scholarly issues, and it also has the significant benefit of including Hume’s Natural History of Religion  together 
with a short editorial introduction and useful explanatory notes  on both works. Bell’s edition seems to be 
targeted more at the general reader — it is, for example, less densely printed and hence much easier on the eye; 
while its introduction weaves major themes from the philosophy of the Treatise  and Enquiry  into the discussion 
of Hume’s life and his views on religion, so as to provide a context for readers unfamiliar with his general 
epistemology. The editorial notes likewise provide helpful references to quotations from Hume’s other writings 
and from the works of rel ated philosophers and historical sources.  
2(d)  Hume’s Essays  
Of Hume’s many essays, the ones most directly relevant to the topics of the Enquiry  are those on religion, in 
particular ‘Of Superstition and Enthusiasm’ and ‘Of the Immortality of the Soul’. Bu t a number of others, for 
example ‘Of the Dignity or Meanness of Human Nature’, ‘The Sceptic’, ‘Of the Standard of Taste’, ‘Of Essay 
Writing’, and ‘Of Suicide’, also cover themes that are pertinent to the Enquiry , either in respect of its 
philosophical con tent or the context and manner of its composition. The standard modern edition of Hume’s 
Essays  is the following:  
 David Hume, Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary  (1741 –83), ed. Eugene F. Miller, 2nd edn. 
(Indianapolis: Liberty Classics, 1987)  
Most of t he essays, including all those mentioned above, are also included in a companion volume to Gaskin’s 
edition of the Dialogues , in Oxford’s World’s Classics  series:  
 David Hume, Selected Essays  (1741 –83), ed. Stephen Copley and Andrew Edgar (Oxford and New Y ork: 
Oxford University Press, 1993)  
2(e)  Other Writings by Hume  
Apart from Hume’s major works dealt with above, and the Abstract  and My Own Life  reprinted in this volume, 
his writings most relevant to the Enquiry  are: 
 David Hume, A Letter from a Gentlema n to his Friend in Edinburgh  (1745), ed. Ernest C. Mossner and 
John V. Price (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1967)  
 The Letters of David Hume , ed. J. Y. T. Greig, 2 vols. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1932)  
 New Letters of David Hume , ed. R. Klibansky and E. C. Mossner (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1954)  
Only two other significant works remain to be mentioned, namely the largely forgotten Dissertation on the 
Passions , which currently has no modern printed edition,3 and the History of England , which fortunat ely does:  
                                                      
3 The Dissertation on the Passions , like most of Hume’s other works, is avai lable in The Philosophical Works of David Hume  edited by 
T. H. Green and T. H. Grose, 4 vols. (London: Longmans, 1882 –6), which has recently been reprinted in facsimile (Bristol: Thoemmes, 
1996). Like other works the Dissertation  is also destined to appear  in the Clarendon Hume series of critical editions from Oxford  6  David Hume, The History of England  (1754 –62), ed. William Todd, 6 vols. (Indianapolis: Liberty 
Classics, 1983)  
Full of historical insight and wry humour, The History of England  will be particularly fascinating for the Hume 
scholar attuned to his  characteristic comments and turns of phrase. However it was written for a more leisured 
age, and its six volumes will probably strike most modern readers as rather heavy going.  
3.  General Secondary Literature on Hume and the Enquiry  
3(a)  Recent General Collections of Scholarly Work on Hume  
Four of the best -known collections of advanced papers on Hume — edited by Chappell (1968), Livingston and 
King (1976), Morice (1977), and Norton, Capaldi and Robison (1979) — are now all more than twenty years 
old, tho ugh still well worth consulting. Relevant papers from them are listed in the sections that follow, as also 
from the 1990 collection Studies in the Philosophy of the Scottish Enlightenment , edited by Stewart. Of far 
more general interest for the study of th e Enquiry  is another recent Stewart volume:  
 Stewart, M. A. and Wright, John P.  (eds.), Hume and Hume’s Connexions  (Edinburgh: Edinburgh 
University Press, 1994)  
whose twelve papers include discussions of Hume’s attempts to become a professor, the influence s on his 
thought, his conception of ‘the science of the mind’ and of ‘probable reasoning’, his early attacks on the Design 
Argument, his treatment of miracles, and his other writings on religion.  
The papers in Hume and Hume’s Connexions  all present new res earch, and are therefore not ideally suited 
for students. A less scholarly but far more systematic overview of Hume’s philosophy, at a relatively 
introductory level, is provided by:  
 Norton, David Fate (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Hume  (Cambridge: Cam bridge University Press, 
1993)  
This contains extremely useful papers by a number of distinguished authors, covering a wide range of topics 
including Hume’s overall approach to philosophy, his science of the mind, his philosophy of science, his 
scepticism, and his view of religion, as well as others less relevant to the Enquiry  (e.g. on Hume’s moral, 
political, aesthetic and historical work).  
Two other recent collections are particularly useful for the purposes of this survey, and will be mentioned 
frequentl y below. Unfortunately both are expensive, and targeted for library rather than for individual purchase, 
but both include a wide range of important reprints which are well worth consulting and are sometimes hard to 
obtain elsewhere. In what follows, these will be referred to as ‘Tweyman (1995)’ and ‘Owen (2000)’ 
respectively:  
 Tweyman, Stanley (ed.), David Hume: Critical Assessments  (London and New York: Routledge, 1995), 
six volumes  
 Owen, David W. D. (ed.), Hume: General Philosophy  (Aldershot and Burlingt on, Vermont: Ashgate, 
2000)  
                                                                                                                                                                                     
University Press. In the meantime, the best practical source for Hume’s more obscure works is probably the InteLex electronic  edition 
mentioned in §1b above.   7 Tweyman’s massive collection aims to cover the whole range of Hume’s philosophy including, amongst many 
others, sections devoted to Hume’s views on epistemology (17 papers), reason (7 papers), induction (7 papers), 
scepticism (9  papers), naturalism (7 papers), causality (19 papers), the external world (4 papers), and religion 
(34 papers). Many of the papers are well -known ‘classics’, but a high proportion date from the 1980s or later, 
and although the editor’s selection is inevit ably controversial in parts, the collection as a whole undoubtedly 
provides the most valuable single resource currently available for articles on Hume.  
Owen’s collection is a single volume of ‘facsimile’ reprints, divided into eight sections of which all b ut the 
one on personal identity have immediate relevance to the Enquiry  (being respectively on methodology, ideas 
and impressions, logic and demonstrative reasoning, belief and probable reasoning, miracles, causation and the 
‘New Hume’, and scepticism). Fo r each section the editor has selected between two and four papers, aiming to 
give good coverage of major areas of recent scholarly debate, and with particular points of interest and 
disagreement being highlighted by his introduction. The papers are of a v ery high standard, and the collection is 
highly topical (with only 3 of the 21 selections predating 1985). It is therefore likely to prove particularly useful 
for readers wishing to get up to date with recent scholarship on Hume’s epistemology and metaphys ics, and to 
acquaint themselves in reasonable detail with some of the major issues that are currently exciting most 
controversy.  
To keep abreast with ongoing developments in Hume scholarship, by far the most valuable resource is the 
journal of the Hume Soc iety: 
 Hume Studies , published by the Hume Society twice yearly (April and November)  
Most of the major contributors to the Hume literature have presented at least some of their work through Hume 
Studies , which is now highly respected in the philosophical c ommunity. Moreover it attracts papers not only 
from specialist scholars, but also from notable contributors to contemporary thought — one recent issue, for 
example, included articles by Annette Baier, Simon Blackburn, David Pears, and Barry Stroud.  
3(b)  G eneral Introductory Books on Hume’s Philosophy in the Enquiry  
The only major single -author work devoted to the philosophy of the Enquiry  is still Antony Flew’s classic:  
 Flew, Antony, Hume’s Philosophy of Belief  (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1961)  
Thoug h extremely dated, and therefore to be treated with caution, this still repays reading on topics where 
Hume’s purposes have long been well understood. The book as a whole is difficult for beginners, partly because 
Flew engages in so many detours to point o ut (often in characteristically forthright terms) the anti -metaphysical 
and anti -theological implications of Hume’s views. However these detours themselves give the book a 
distinctive value, especially in Flew’s chapters on Hume’s Fork (ch. 3), on liberty and necessity (ch.  7), and on 
the Design Argument (ch.  9), in all of which his broad sympathy with Hume’s views are very evident. Also 
worth consulting are his chapters on ‘the objects of the exercise’ (ch. 1), on belief (ch. 5), on scepticism 
(ch. 10), an d on the Copy Principle (ch. 2), in the last of which he takes a somewhat similar line to Bennett in 
Chapter  3 of this volume. The book is weakest where Flew has least sympathy with what he takes to be Hume’s 
position, most notably in the case of his deduc tivist interpretation of the famous argument concerning induction 
(which also unfortunately distorts his otherwise useful treatment of miracles — hence my preference in §9a 
below for his 1959 article on the topic).  
An engaging introduction to most of the c entral aspects of Hume’s philosophy in the Enquiry , which 
combines the text of Sections II, III, IV, VII and XI (and of two second Enquiry  appendices) with editorial 
commentary at a level suitable for beginners, is:   8  Penelhum, Terence, David Hume: An Intro duction to His Philosophical System  (West Lafayette, Indiana: 
Purdue University Press, 1992)  
Penelhum’s account of Hume’s motivations (which he developed in the article cited in §10c below) will be of 
interest to scholars as well as students: he identifies  the essence of Hume’s ‘sceptical’ view as being that 
philosophy itself should not be taken too seriously, since so far from bringing inner peace and tranquillity — as 
often traditionally claimed — it can instead lead to bewilderment and despair. Penelhum’ s discussions of the 
theory of ideas, cause and effect, and the Design Argument are less distinctive, but are all very clear and 
philosophically well -informed. His appendix ‘Some Notes on the Hume Literature’ is also useful, if rather dated 
(containing ver y few reference beyond 1985).  
3(c)  Hume’s Life, his Aims in the Enquiry, and its Relation to the Treatise  
The standard biography of Hume, which is thorough, generally accurate, and provides valuable discussion 
concerning the background to his publications , is: 
 Mossner, Ernest Campbell, The Life of David Hume , 2nd edn. (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1980)  
The traditional accusation that Hume was led to write the Enquiry  for vulgar motives of popular notoriety 
(discussed in §4 of Chapter  1 of this volume) has lo ng since been thoroughly disposed of, the two best -known 
refutations being:  
 Kemp Smith, Norman, The Philosophy of David Hume  (London: Macmillan, 1941), ch. 24  
 Mossner, Ernest Campbell, ‘Philosophy and Biography: The Case of David Hume’, Philosophical Rev iew 
59 (1950), 184 –201; repr. in V. C. Chappell (ed.), Hume  (London and Melbourne: Macmillan, 1968), 6 –34 
More recently the same ground has been covered by:  
 Buckle, Stephen, ‘Hume’s Biography and Hume’s Philosophy’, Australasian Journal of Philosophy  77 
(1999), 1 –25 
Buckle presents the Enquiry  as a coherent and unified work, distinguished from the Treatise  primarily in its 
greater focus on an ‘experimentalism’ inspired by Newtonian science. Humean experimentalism involves a 
preference for mechanistic expla nations and an eschewal of speculation about ultimate causes, both of which 
are prominent themes in the Enquiry , from the theory of association of ideas with which it begins (in Sections  II 
and III) to the mitigated scepticism with which it ends (in Sectio n XII). 
Although Buckle seems to suggest that the move from the Treatise  to the Enquiry  is primarily a change of 
focus rather than of philosophical position, he approvingly mentions (p.  17) an article by Immerwahr whose aim 
is to provide a deeper account:  
 Immerwahr, John, ‘A Skeptic’s Progress: Hume’s Preference for the First Enquiry ’, in David Fate Norton, 
Nicholas Capaldi, and Wade L. Robison (eds.), McGill Hume Studies  (San Diego: Austin Hill Press, 1979), 
227–38 
Immerwahr draws attention to Hume’s dist inction in the Treatise  between the ‘general and more establish’d 
properties of the imagination’ and the ‘trivial properties of the fancy’ ( T 225, 267 –8). The latter are the dubious 
source of much theology and rationalist metaphysics, but in the Treatise  Hume is unable consistently to 
condemn them, because (as made clear at T 185–6 and 268) they also play a crucial role in avoiding the 
corrosive scepticism to which the ‘general properties’ give rise in Treatise  I . iv. 1. Immerwahr sees the Enquiry  
as provi ding Hume with a more satisfactory basis for his critical purposes, avoiding radical scepticism not by 
reliance on the ‘trivial properties’, but instead by limiting the ‘general properties’ to the subjects appropriate for  9 human investigation. Other writers  too — notably Penelhum, Norton and Fogelin — have viewed the sceptical 
outlook of the two works as significantly different, contrasting the calm mitigated scepticism of the Enquiry  
with the unstable ‘on -again -off-again’ Pyrrhonism of the Treatise  (the wor ks of all three authors are discussed 
in §10c below). But this picture has recently been contested by:  
 McCormick, Miriam, ‘A Change in Manner: Hume’s Scepticism in the Treatise  and the first Enquiry ’, 
Canadian Journal of Philosophy  29 (1999), 431 –47 
McCor mick stresses instead the continuity between the Treatise  and the Enquiry , by arguing that the sceptical 
attitude of the Treatise  is (despite some appearances to the contrary) virtually identical to that which is 
expressed much more clearly in the Enquiry . 
Differences between the Treatise  and the Enquiry  are not, of course, confined to Hume’s account of 
scepticism. One very significant change in the Enquiry , to which Noxon draws attention, is the separation of 
philosophical from psychological theorising, wh ich in the Treatise  were densely intertwined:  
 Noxon, James, Hume’s Philosophical Development  (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973), especially 12 –26, 
153–65, 180 –7 
On Noxon’s account, Hume’s later works quite generally separate the critical from the constructiv e elements of 
his philosophy, a separation most evident in his later moral and political writings which (unlike the Treatise ) 
tend to establish their positions on the basis of direct observation rather than psychological theory. This 
separation leaves the Enquiry  focusing on the critical aspects of Hume’s philosophy, with little attempt to forge 
any connexion (e.g.  through the theory of association; cf. Dauer’s paper in §4a below) with the psychological 
complexities that had figured so prominently in the Treatise , but which had ultimately, and inevitably, proved 
incapable of providing a criterion for distinguishing science from superstition. Noxon sees Hume in the Enquiry  
as adopting a new criterion, a ‘Principle of Methodological Consistency’, based on the idea that legitimate 
science is a development of the methods ‘of common life, methodized and corrected’ ( E 162). Such a principle 
obviously harmonises well with the mitigated scepticism emphasised by Buckle and Immerwahr, but its 
adoption need not in itsel f imply any doubts about the psychological theories of the Treatise , even if Hume now 
sees them as largely irrelevant to his main critical purposes. Nelson, however, argues that the divide between 
the Treatise  and the Enquiry  goes deeper still, with Hume’s  repudiation of the earlier work being motivated by 
the recognition that it is contaminated with metaphysics of the very kind that he would later famously condemn 
in Enquiry  XII: 
 Nelson, John O., ‘Two Main Questions concerning Hume’s Treatise  and Enquiry ’, Philosophical Review  
81 (1972), 333 –7 
Nelson’s theory is itself forcefully repudiated by:  
 Cummins, Phillip D., ‘Hume’s Disavowal of the Treatise ’, Philosophical Review  82 (1973), 371 –9 
who argues that the Enquiry  differs from the Treatise  in respect of its psychology rather than its metaphysics. 
Indeed the only major Humean metaphysical doctrine whose absence from the Enquiry  Cummins acknowledges 
(p. 379, note  35) is the bundle theory of the self, though he downplays even this by suggesting that Hume’s 
famous difficulties with that theory (expressed in the Appendix to the Treatise ) are relatively superficial, 
concerning only the explanation of our belief  in personal identity. Flage, by contrast, takes Hume’s difficulties 
with the bundle theory to be funda mental, even to the extent of providing the main reason for his dissatisfaction 
with the theory of mind in the Treatise , and motivating his move in the Enquiry  to a far less ambitious theory 
which aspires only to lawful description of the mind’s operations  and makes no attempt to draw conclusions 
about the nature of the mind itself:   10  Flage, Daniel E., David Hume’s Theory of Mind  (London and New York: Routledge, 1990), ch. 8; also 
available from the website www.etext.leeds.ac.uk/hume/   
Flage’s account also i mplies that Hume’s problems with personal identity were the primary reason for his 
apparent loss of confidence in associationism (as documented in §4 of Chapter  1 of this volume). However 
Broackes (in Chapter  6) argues that despite these problems the bundl e theory continued to underlie Hume’s 
psychological theorising, while Bell (in Chapter  5) suggests that much of Hume’s associationism may simply 
have been omitted from the Enquiry  rather than rejected. As this wide range of different views testifies, we ar e 
still some way from any consensus on what lies behind the differences between the Treatise  and the Enquiry . 
Nor should we restrict our attention here to philosophical considerations, for as Stewart makes clear in 
Chapter  2, at least some aspects of the Enquiry  were significantly influenced not only by literary considerations, 
but also by some more personal and historical concerns.  
4.  The Nature and Origin of Ideas  
4(a)  Impressions and Ideas, Force and Vivacity  
An excellent introduction to Hume’s theory of ideas, and also his theory of belief, appears in a volume aimed at 
pre-university students. In this paper, Craig also explicitly relates these theories to his ‘Image of God’ 
interpretation as discussed in Chapter  7. 
 Craig, Edward, ‘Hume on Thought and Belief’, in Godfrey Vesey (ed.), Philosophers Ancient and Modern  
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), 93 –110 
Stroud’s well -known book provides a rather more advanced discussion of the main features of Hume’s theory 
of ideas, though it is generall y focused far more on the Treatise  than on the Enquiry : 
 Stroud, Barry, Hume  (London and Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1977), ch. 2  
 Hume’s fundamental distinction between impressions and ideas is founded on the notion of ‘force and 
vivacity’, which Stro ud — like Bennett in Chapter 3 — interprets in the most straightforward way, as 
phenomenological intensity. Both Bennett and Stroud accordingly find Hume’s distinction inadequate to 
capture the difference he intends, between feeling and thinking. Govier su ggests that a more satisfactory 
position can be developed by recognising forcefulness and vivacity as two distinguishable characteristics of 
Humean perceptions, with a forceful perception being one that has a sustained causal influence, and a vivacious 
perception being one that is clear and intense. Then ‘force’ corresponds to distinctions related to degrees of 
belief, and ‘vivacity’ to the distinction between impressions and ideas:  
 Govier, Trudy, ‘Variations on Force and Vivacity in Hume’, Philosophical Q uarterly  22 (1972), 44 –52 
Govier thus differs from Stroud and Bennett in taking ‘force and vivacity’ to be functional as much as 
phenomenological. Everson goes even further, arguing that Humean ‘force and vivacity’ should be interpreted 
exclusively in func tional rather than phenomenological terms:  
 Everson, Stephen, ‘The Difference between Feeling and Thinking’, Mind  97 (1988), 401 –13; repr. in 
Tweyman (1995) vol. i, 10 –24 and in Owen (2000), 57 –69 
However a functional interpretation of force and vivacity m akes its availability to consciousness problematic, 
and therefore seems hard to square with Hume’s use of the notion. A recent discussion of the issue, proposing 
an alternative account according to which the ‘force and vivacity’ of impressions involves the ir sense of 
‘presentedness’, is provided by:   11  Dauer, Francis W., ‘Force and Vivacity in the Treatise  and the Enquiry ’, Hume Studies  25 (1999), 83 –99 
Dauer’s account has the implication that the ‘force and vivacity’ of impressions, memories and beliefs, tho ugh 
somewhat analogous, are nevertheless distinct. He sees this as motivating Hume’s move away from the 
‘hydraulic’ model of belief (as outlined in §7 of Chapter 1) and therefore having significance in respect of the 
philosophical differences between the Treatise  and the Enquiry . 
Hume’s hydraulic language may itself have even more direct relevance to the interpretation of his 
conception of force and vivacity (at least in the Treatise ), for Wright draws on eighteenth century physiology to 
suggest that he may  have intended such language to be understood quite literally:  
 Wright, John P., The Sceptical Realism of David Hume  (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1983), 
§19 
In the wake of twentieth -century philosophy it is natural to dismiss such a literalist ic account as too crude to be 
worth considering. But a striking corrective is provided by recent work on neurophysiology, which suggests 
that Hume’s admittedly simplistic theories of mental activity may contain a germ of truth. As Damasio, a 
prominent neur ologist, puts it (p.  108): ‘The images reconstituted from the brain’s interior are less vivid than 
those prompted by the exterior. They are “faint”, as David Hume put it, in comparison with the “lively” images 
generated by stimuli from outside the brain. B ut they are images nonetheless.’  
 Damasio, Antonio R., Descartes’ Error , Papermac edition (London and Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1996), 
ch. 5 
Later in his book (especially chapters 8, 9 and 11), Damasio emphasises another more fundamental respect in 
which Hum e anticipated modern neuroscience: his insistence on the essential role of feeling within human 
reasoning, evident in his theory of belief in Enquiry  V (and even more so in the Treatise , e.g. T 103 and 183). 
There is, of course, an intimate connexion betwe en Hume’s theory of ideas and his theory of belief, as brought 
out in a rich discussion by Flage which takes the ‘force and vivacity’ issue close to the territory covered by 
Broackes in Chapter 6:  
 Flage, Daniel E., David Hume’s Theory of Mind  (London and New York: Routledge, 1990), appendix 
entitled ‘Force and Vivacity’; an adapted version appears in Tweyman (1995), vol. i, 56 –74 
To explore further in this direction, see the items listed in §6a below (most notably MacNabb’s chapter and the 
end of the chapt er by Bricke, both of which discuss the ‘force and vivacity’ of beliefs).  
4(b)  The Copy Principle  
Bennett, in Chapter 3, casts serious doubt on the arguments that Hume presents for his Copy Principle, but 
nevertheless finds philosophical value in it by fu ndamentally reinterpreting it away from the idiom of ‘ideas’. A 
recent book which spells out Bennett’s approach at a more elementary level is:  
 Dicker, Georges, Hume’s Epistemology & Metaphysics  (London and New York: Routledge, 1998), 5 –14 
Others have atte mpted to defend Hume in ways that do less violence to his professed philosophical foundations. 
Garrett, in a thought -provoking examination of the whole issue, maintains that Hume consistently treats the 
Copy Principle as a well -confirmed empirical generali sation, and counters Bennett’s negative assessment of 
Hume’s arguments for it when thus interpreted:  
 Garrett, Don, Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy  (Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1997), ch. 2   12 One notorious puzzle for making se nse of Hume’s position is posed by his dismissive reaction to an apparent 
counterexample to the Copy Principle, the ‘missing shade of blue’ ( E 20–1). Bennett’s reinterpretation of the 
principle may seem to explain this away, but the adequacy of such a solu tion is challenged by:  
 Cummins, Robert, ‘The Missing Shade of Blue’, Philosophical Review  87 (1978), 548 –65 
who interprets the having of a Humean idea not as understanding  a term, but as the possession of a 
recognitional capacity . Garrett’s alternative so lution is based on the natural resemblances which Hume 
acknowledges between simple ideas. For those seeking a summary of the debate, Bennett’s approach and that of 
Fogelin (which is similar to Garrett’s) are outlined by Noonan:  
 Noonan, Harold W., Hume on Knowledge  (London and New York: Routledge, 1999), ch. 2  
However Noonan’s chapter is valuable more as an introduction to the general topic than as an account of 
Hume’s thinking in the Enquiry , for it focuses as least as much on the philosophical as on the s cholarly issues, 
and is explicitly concerned with the Treatise . Another work devoted to the Treatise  provides a philosophically 
deep discussion of the Copy Principle, aiming to steer a course between the positivist approach favoured by 
Bennett, and the nat uralism exemplified by Garrett:  
 Pears, David, Hume’s System  (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1990), ch. 1 and 2  
 Noxon takes a very different view of the Copy Principle, proposing an ‘instrumentalist’ interpretation 
according to which the pr inciple is a ‘rule of procedure for analysis’ rather than a universal generalization:  
 Noxon, James, Hume’s Philosophical Development  (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973), 138 –48 
Livingston provides yet another perspective, relating the Copy Principle, as a cri terion of ‘internal’ conceptual 
mastery, to a general interpretation of Hume which sees him primarily as a historically rather than scientifically 
oriented philosopher:  
 Livingston, Donald W., Hume’s Philosophy of Common Life  (Chicago and London: Universit y of Chicago 
Press, 1984), ch. 3 –4 
Livingston does not accept any need for the sort of rational reconstruction undertaken by Bennett, for on his 
account, Hume’s understanding of language is already far more sophisticated than the simplistic traditional 
interpretation — according to which Hume takes word meanings to be images copied from impressions — from 
which Bennett begins. In challenging this traditional interpretation Livingston draws on an influential paper by 
Árdal, which discusses Hume’s account of abstract ideas and moral conventions (though this obviously moves 
the discussion a long way from the direct concerns of the Enquiry ): 
 Árdal, Páll S., ‘Convention and Value’, in George P.  Morice (ed.), David Hume: Bicentenary Papers  
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh U niversity Press, 1977), 51 –68; repr. in Tweyman (1995) vol. iv, 61 –77 
 Those wishing to follow up these issues through contemporary discussions in the philosophy of language 
will find that much recent work is fearsomely difficult. However Blackburn and Mil ler provide two relatively 
accessible introductions, which take highly contrasting approaches while both giving significant attention to 
Humean issues:  
 Blackburn, Simon, Spreading the Word  (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 1984)  
 Miller, Alexander, Philosophy of Language  (London: UCL Press, 1998)  
Blackburn’s treatment of the general problem of meaning occupies his first four chapters, with chapter 2 
explaining the inadequacies of the Locke –Hume theory of ideas in this context. But whereas Blackburn st arts  13 from the empiricists and takes a broadly Gricean ‘convention -belief’ (or ‘communication -intention’) approach, 
Miller starts from Frege and prefers the more fashionable ‘truth -conditional’ style of meaning theory, explicitly 
opposing (in his chapter  7) some of Blackburn’s arguments. Miller’s chapter  3 is of particular interest for its 
discussion of the verification principle, around which the logical positivists — claiming inspiration from 
Hume’s Copy Principle — built their theory of meaning (however t heir claim to be Hume’s heirs is certainly 
disputable, as made clear for example by Craig’s book mentioned in 9c below).  
5.  Reason and Induction  
5(a)  Hume’s Philosophical Logic  
Though fundamental to his philosophy, there has been relatively little detail ed discussion of Hume’s distinction 
between ‘relations of ideas’ and ‘matters of fact’. Flew’s chapter in his 1961 book remains valuable for a 
general introduction to the status and philosophical point of what he named ‘Hume’s Fork’:  
 Flew, Antony, Hume’s Philosophy of Belief  (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1961), ch. 3  
A thorough recent discussion of the distinction appears in an introductory text:  
 Dicker, Georges, Hume’s Epistemology & Metaphysics  (London and New York: Routledge, 1998), ch.  2 
Both Flew and Dicker relate Hume’s Fork to Kant’s analytic –synthetic distinction; indeed Dicker gives Hume’s 
position a surprisingly Kantian flavour, by suggesting that it leaves room for synthetic a priori principles 
(including, on his account, Hume’s Fork itself),  since he interprets Hume’s ‘matters of fact’ as being restricted 
to propositions that either assert or deny existence. Most have instead taken Hume’s Fork to correspond to the 
analytic –synthetic distinction as understood by the logical positivists such as  Ayer, according to whom ‘a 
proposition is analytic when its validity depends solely on the definitions of the symbols it contains [or in 
Humean language, the nature of the ideas], and synthetic when its validity is determined by the facts of 
experience.’ (p. 105):  
 Ayer, A. J., Language, Truth and Logic , 2nd edn. (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1971), ch. 4  
The analytic –synthetic distinction, thus understood, was famously criticised by Quine and then defended by 
Grice and Strawson:  
 Quine, Willard Van Orman, ‘Two  Dogmas of Empiricism’, in From a Logical Point of View  (Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: Harvard University Press, 1953), 20 –46; repr. in Paul K. Moser (ed.), A Priori Knowledge  
(Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1987), 42 –67 
 Grice, H. P.  and Straws on, P.  F., ‘In Defense of a Dogma’, Philosophical Review  65 (1956), 141 –58; repr. 
in Paul Grice, Studies in the Way of Words  (Cambridge, Massachusetts and London: Harvard University 
Press, 1989), 196 –212 
Miller provides an up -to-date commentary on this deb ate, also introducing some important related issues 
(notably Quine’s thesis of the indeterminacy of translation) and giving advice for further reading:  
 Miller, Alexander, Philosophy of Language  (London: UCL Press, 1998), ch. 4  
Also of particular interest is the ‘pragmatic’ approach to analyticity taken by Aune, in his attempt to develop a 
‘reformed’ Humean empiricism on the way to solving the problem of the external world:  
 Aune, Bruce, Knowledge of the External World  (London and New York: Routledge, 1991) , 57–9, 86 –90, 
144–56  14 Along with the famous Quinean objections, some more recent issues in the theory of reference — associated 
with the work of Kripke — pose new difficulties for any simple binary distinction such as Hume’s Fork. Since, 
however, these tec hnical difficulties are unlikely to carry significant implications for Hume’s philosophical 
purposes, it will suffice here to mention one article that usefully introduces the logical issues, reprinted within a 
topical collection which provides a good start ing point for those wishing to dig deeper:  
 Swinburne, R. G., ‘Analyticity, Necessity, and Apriority’, Mind  84 (1975), 225 –43; repr. in Paul K. Moser 
(ed.), A Priori Knowledge  (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1987), 170 –89 
 A potentially more  serious problem for Hume concerns the adequacy of his famous maxim that whatever is 
conceivable is possible — the Conceivability Principle — which serves as his principal criterion for 
distinguishing between relations of ideas and matters of fact ( A 650, E 25–6, 35, 48). Hume has often been 
supposed to accept in addition the (far more questionable) Inconceivability Principle, that whatever is 
inconceivable is impossible, which would have significant implications for his views on such things as the 
possibil ity of alternative senses ( E 20), causal realism ( E 33, 67 –8), the external world ( E 154–5), and infinite 
divisibility ( E 155–8). Lightner argues forcefully that such an attribution would be incorrect:  
 Lightner, D. Tycerium, ‘Hume on Conceivability and In conceivability’, Hume Studies  23 (1997), 113 –32 
But the Conceivability Principle is itself controversial. Tidman considers various possible interpretations of 
‘conceivable’, concluding that none of them can justify Hume’s maxim because ‘merely conceiving o f a state of 
affairs gives us no reason whatsoever to think that state of affairs to be possible’ (p.  298):  
 Tidman, Paul, ‘Conceivability as a Test for Possibility’, American Philosophical Quarterly  31 (1994), 
297–309 
Tidman attributes the appeal of the m axim to a confusion between conceiving of a state of affairs, and having a 
modal intuition (which sometimes accompanies such conceiving). Yablo implicitly disputes, however, whether 
this is indeed a confusion if ‘conceiving’ is interpreted in the appropria te manner:  
 Yablo, Stephen, ‘Is Conceivability a Guide to Possibility?’, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research  
53 (1993), 1 –42 
On this account, ‘I find p conceivable if I can imagine .  . . a situation .  . . of which I truly believe that p’ (p. 26), 
and ‘to imagine an X is thereby  to enjoy the appearance that an X could exist’ (p.  30). Hence conceivability 
itself (in the appropriate sense) involves modal intuition, though Yablo concedes that such intuition is not 
infallible. Nor is it always available, an d his corresponding account of inconceivability — as inability to 
imagine a situation ‘that I don’t take to falsify p’ (p. 29) — leaves room for states of affairs that are neither 
conceivable nor inconceivable, and hence can be classed as ‘undecidable’. Th is provides a straightforward way 
of dealing with alleged counterexamples to the Conceivability Principle including mathematical propositions 
(e.g. Goldbach’s Conjecture) whose necessary truth or necessary falsehood is currently unknown. An 
alternative app roach to such mathematical objections (which were first raised by Thomas Reid) is suggested by 
Casullo, who recommends revising the Conceivability and Inconceivability principles in a way that harmonises 
with Hume’s distinction between intuition and demons tration:  
 Casullo, Albert, ‘Reid and Mill on Hume’s Maxim of Conceivability’, Analysis  39 (1979), 212 –9 
Casullo’s proposal is to treat inconceivability as a criterion of impossibility only in the case of propositions 
knowable by intuition (those simple eno ugh to enable the mind to ‘see’ directly the relationship between the 
ideas involved). More complex propositions — those knowable only by demonstration — will then be 
necessarily true (and hence classed as relations of ideas) if and only if they are ‘deriv able from other  15 propositions whose denials describe inconceivable states of affairs, using only principles of inference whose 
denials are inconceivable’ (p.  215).  
Despite all these complications, Hume’s distinction between ‘analytic’ relations of ideas and  ‘synthetic’ 
matters of fact is widely accepted and taken for granted, at least for the general run of propositions (leaving 
aside, for example, difficult problem cases involving theoretical terms whose meaning can evolve as science 
develops). However othe r aspects of Hume’s philosophical logic are far more problematic, partly because his 
evident contempt for scholastic syllogism in particular seems to have given him a mistakenly dismissive 
attitude to formal rigour in general. Two searching discussions of his ‘logic’ are now rather dated, but still 
extremely helpful for highlighting some of the resulting difficulties:  
 Bennett, Jonathan, Locke, Berkeley, Hume: Central Themes  (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971), ch.  10 
 Passmore, John, Hume’s Intentions , 3rd edn . (London: Duckworth, 1980), ch. 2  
Fortunately, many of the issues to which Bennett and Passmore draw attention (e.g. in Hume’s theory of 
relations) impact more on the Treatise  than on the Enquiry , but a notable exception is Hume’s distinction 
between ‘dem onstrative’ and ‘probable’ reasoning, which plays a fundamental role in Enquiry  IV and XII. My 
own attempt to clarify Hume’s understanding of this distinction is most concisely presented in §2 of:  
 Millican, P.  J. R., ‘Hume’s Argument concerning Induction:  Structure and Interpretation’, in Tweyman 
(1995), vol. ii, 91 –144; repr. in Owen (2000), 165 –218 
and more extensively developed in Chapter  4 of the current volume (§3.1 and §7.1). Here I argue — against the 
general trend — that Hume’s distinction correspo nds quite closely to the modern distinction between 
‘deductive’ and ‘inductive’ reasoning, where the former is understood in an informal  (i.e. semantic rather than 
syntactic) manner. The most thorough recent discussions on the other side of this debate are : 
 Owen, David, ‘Hume on Demonstration’, in Patricia Easton (ed.), Logic and the Workings of the Mind: the 
Logic of Ideas and Faculty Psychology in Early Modern Philosophy , North American Kant Society Studies 
in Philosophy 5 (Atascadero, California: Ridgev iew Publishing Company, 1997), 153 –74; repr. in Owen 
(2000), 109 –30 
 Owen, David, Hume’s Reason  (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), ch. 5  
However it is important to note that Owen tends to interpret ‘deductive’ as meaning formally  deducti ve, a 
concept admittedly quite foreign to Hume’s philosophy given his contempt for formal logic.  
5(b)  The Structure of Hume’s Argument concerning Induction  
For many years Stove’s analysis of Hume’s famous argument, which interpreted it as relying on the i mplicit 
premise of deductivism, was commonly taken to be authoritative:  
 Stove, D. C., ‘Hume, Probability, and Induction’, Philosophical Review  74 (1965), 160 –77; repr. in V. C. 
Chappell (ed.), Hume  (London and Melbourne: Macmillan, 1968), 187 –212 and in T weyman (1995), vol. 
ii, 29 –43 
 Stove, D. C., Probability and Hume’s Inductive Scepticism  (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973)  
Detailed criticisms of Stove’s interpretation, together with alternative accounts of the structure of Hume’s 
argument, are provided by:  
 Morris, William Edward, ‘Hume’s Refutation of Inductive Probabilism’, in James H. Fetzer (ed.), 
Probability and Causality  (Dordrecht: Reidel, 1988), 43 –77  16  Millican, P.  J. R., ‘Hume’s Argument concerning Induction: Structure and Interpretation’, in Tweym an 
(1995), vol. ii, 91 –144; repr. in Owen (2000), 165 –218 
Both focus mainly on the Enquiry , and although broadly similar in spirit, they differ significantly both in the 
points made and in the structure diagrams they propose for Hume’s argument. Morris con centrates his fire on 
Mackie and Stove before presenting his own analysis. My own article is more wide -ranging in its criticisms of 
earlier authors, but says virtually nothing about Mackie and gives less textual detail on Stove. However it 
includes (in §11 ) a discussion of Stove’s probabilistic account of Hume’s conclusion, arguing that this is 
implausible quite independently of the defects of his structural analysis. Note that there is no need to consult 
this paper for my own structural analysis of Hume’s argument, which Chapter  4 repeats in an improved form (in 
other respects the papers are very different, and only the detailed textual commentary — most of which I saw 
no reason to change — contains a high proportion of material in common).  
5(c)  Interpreta tions of Hume on Reason and Induction  
Together with the work listed in §5b above, Chapter  4 of the current volume, and the appendix to Don Garrett’s 
Chapter  11 (which develops two sections from his 1997 book), the following represent the main contemporary 
currents of thought in the interpretation of Hume’s argument concerning induction:  
 Beauchamp, Tom and Rosenberg, Alexander, Hume and the Problem of Causation  (Oxford and New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1981), ch. 2  
 Broughton, Janet, ‘Hume’s Skepticism  about Causal Inferences’, Pacific Philosophical Quarterly  64 
(1983), 3 –18; repr. in Owen (2000), 149 –64 
 Noonan, Harold W., Hume on Knowledge  (London and New York: Routledge, 1999), 110 –34 
 Owen, David, Hume’s Reason  (Oxford and New York: Oxford Universit y Press, 1999), ch. 6  
 Winkler, Kenneth, ‘Hume’s Inductive Skepticism’, in Margaret Atherton (ed.), The Empiricists  (Lanham, 
Maryland: Rowman & Littlefield, 1999), 183 –212 
All those listed here except Winkler interpret Hume’s argument as non -sceptical, and  therefore depart radically 
from the traditional view of his intentions. Winkler aims to re -establish the traditional sceptical view with 
reference both to the writings of Hume’s contemporaries and to other parts of the Treatise  and Enquiry  
(including in p articular Section  XII). 
Beauchamp, Rosenberg and Broughton see Hume as opposing only a narrowly rationalist conception of 
induction; so when he denies that induction is founded on reason, they take him to be understanding ‘reason’ in 
a deductivist sense. B ut since elsewhere Hume frequently operates with a notion of reason that embraces 
‘probable’ as well as ‘demonstrative’ inference, this implies an ambiguity in his use of the term, as spelt out in 
the following well -known article:  
 Winters, Barbara, ‘Hume on Reason’, Hume Studies  5 (1979), 20 –35; repr. in Owen (2000), 133 –48 
However an anti -deductivist conception of Hume’s argument is vulnerable to objections of a fairly 
straightforward kind, as presented in §14 of my 1995 paper and developed at greater len gth in:  
 Garrett, Don, Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy  (Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1997), 83 –91 
§13 of my own paper suggests a different ambiguity, interpreting ‘reason’ within Hume’s argument as a notion 
involving quasi -perceptual insight, and detecting two other notions of reason elsewhere in Hume’s writings (for 
further development of the perceptual notion, but without discussion of the ambiguity thesis, see §2 of  17 Chapter  4). Garrett denies any ambiguity in Hume’s notion,  as do Owen and Noonan — all three see the 
intention of Hume’s argument as being to deny the dependence of inductive inferences on ratiocination , rather 
than to prove such inferences’ unreasonableness (on any conception of ‘reason’).  
As the dates of many o f these contributions make clear, this is a very active area of current debate amongst 
Hume scholars. Part of that ongoing debate can be found in the pages of Hume Studies , which remains the 
obvious place to look for further developments:  
 Millican, Peter,  ‘Hume on Reason and Induction: Epistemology or Cognitive Science?’, Hume Studies  24 
(1998), 141 –59 
 Garrett, Don, ‘Ideas, Reason, and Skepticism: Replies to my Critics’, Hume Studies  24 (1998), 171 –94 
especially 177 –88 
Here Garrett mounts a spirited and u ncompromising defence against my attack on his 1997 interpretation, and 
moreover goes onto the offensive against my 1995 paper. My latest response to him and to Noonan’s and 
Owen’s recent work is, of course, to be found in Chapter  4 of the current volume, §10.3 of which develops 
detailed logical objections to all non -sceptical interpretations of Hume’s argument.  
5(d)  Inductive Scepticism  
An undemanding but philosophically deep introduction to the general issue of inductive scepticism, eminently 
suitable fo r beginning students but entertaining at any level, is:  
 Salmon, Wesley, An Encounter with David Hume , in Joel Feinberg (ed.), Reason and Responsibility , 3rd 
edn. (Encino and Belmont, California: Dickenson Publishing Company, 1975), 190 –208 
Whether Hume wa s himself an inductive sceptic is, as we have seen, a very controversial issue, but whatever 
his own views, the famous ‘problem of induction’ is probably his most celebrated philosophical legacy. A good 
background for exploring the issues, starting with th e editor’s introduction, is provided by:  
 Swinburne, Richard (ed.), The Justification of Induction  (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1974)  
Swinburne considers three traditional methods of attempting to justify induction — the ‘analytic’, the 
‘pragmatic’, a nd the ‘inductive’ — and the same three methods are also discussed by Skyrms’ book mentioned 
in §6b below (which is particularly useful for its detailed treatment of the inductive justification, perhaps the 
most challenging of the traditional methods and o f particular recent interest because of its application to 
‘abduction’ or ‘inference to the best explanation’, for which see Psillos’ book in §10a below). Neither 
Swinburne nor Skyrms, however, considers attempts to justify induction by appeal to a priori probability, which 
(for reasons explained in §7.2 of Chapter  4) would neatly sidestep Hume’s negative argument if only they could 
be made to work. They would also pose an unambiguous challenge to Hume, unlike the ‘analytic’ and 
‘pragmatic’ justifications, which both contain elements of similarity with Hume’s own views. Two interesting 
attempts to develop such a probabilistic justification of induction, which combine accessibly presented technical 
ideas with illuminating philosophical discussion, are provide d by:  
 Blackburn, Simon, Reason and Prediction  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1973), ch. 7  
 Mackie, J. L., ‘A Defence of Induction’, in G. F. Macdonald (ed.),  Perception and Identity  (Ithaca: Cornell 
University Press, 1979), 113 –30; repr. in Logic  and Knowledge  (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 
1985), 159 –77 
Both Blackburn and Mackie aim to justify induction through the extrapolation of general uniformity, but 
historically a more popular way of attempting a probabilistic justification is by ap plying a statistical ‘law of  18 large numbers’ to specific events. Such attempts date back to Laplace, and the most persuasive are perhaps 
those of De Finetti and D.  C. Williams. Stove has recently developed Williams’ argument further, and presented 
it in a f orm suitable for a non -technical audience. (But note that Stove gives two distinct probabilistic arguments 
against Hume, the first of which — in chapter 5 of his book — is far less interesting, depending as it does on his 
questionable analysis of Hume’s co nclusion mentioned in §5b above.)  
 Stove, D. C., The Rationality of Induction  (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 1986), ch. 6  
Although most modern philosophers would be highly sceptical about the possibility of any such justification of 
induction, no c lear refutation of Blackburn, De Finetti, or Williams/Stove has yet been published (for criticism 
of Mackie, see P.  J. R. Millican, ‘Mackie’s Defence of Induction’, Analysis  42 (1982), 19 –24). The question of 
whether Humean inductive scepticism can be over come using probability theory remains open.  
6.  Belief, Probability, Rationality, and the Reason of Animals  
This section covers four aspects of Hume’s thought which are quite closely interrelated and a full understanding 
of which requires reference to the Treatise , where Hume’s theories of the mechanics of belief, and of the 
criteria for acceptable and unacceptable probable inference, are far more elaborate than in the Enquiry . In the 
Treatise , belief is explained using an explicit ‘hydraulic’ model which i n the Enquiry  is quietly dropped (see the 
reference to Dauer’s paper in §4a above). Partly as a result of this, the detailed sections on ‘the probability of 
chances’ ( I. iii. 11), ‘the probability of causes’ ( I. iii. 12), ‘unphilosophical probability’ ( I. iii. 13), and ‘rules by 
which to judge of causes and effects’ ( I. iii. 15), which together constitute around a third of the central part of 
Treatise  Book  I, are reduced in the Enquiry  to the small Section  VI ‘Of Probability’ and the long footnote to 
Sectio n IX ‘Of the Reason of Animals’. Apparently Hume considered these details inessential to his main 
philosophical purposes in the Enquiry , and although many would agree — especially in respect of his simplistic 
theory of the mechanics of belief — nevertheles s his treatment of the criteria for correct probable reasoning 
remains of great importance in assessing the implications of the mitigated scepticism which he develops in 
Section  XII. 
6(a)  Hume’s Theory of Belief  
A dated but still philosophically interesti ng overview of sections  V and VI of the Enquiry  is provided by:  
 Flew, Antony, Hume’s Philosophy of Belief  (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1961), ch. 5  
The essays in this volume by Bell and Broackes (Chapters 5 and  6) dig deeper, addressing changes in Hum e’s 
account of belief between the Treatise  and the Enquiry , and drawing attention to many relevant interpretative 
and philosophical issues. For further investigation of these issues the following are helpful, though they pay 
relatively little attention to the development of Hume’s thought:  
 Hodges, M. and Lachs, J., ‘Hume on Belief’, Review of Metaphysics  30 (1976), 3 –18; repr. in Tweyman 
(1995), vol. i, 144 –57 
 Gorman, Michael M., ‘Hume’s Theory of Belief’, Hume Studies  19 (1993), 89 –101 
 MacNabb, D. G. C. , David Hume: His Theory of Knowledge and Morality , 2nd edn. (Oxford: Blackwell, 
1966), ch.  5 
 Pears, David, Hume’s System  (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1990), ch. 4 and 5  
 Bricke, John, Hume’s Philosophy of Mind  (Edinburgh: Edinburgh Univ ersity Press, 1980), ch. 6   19 Hodges and Lachs, like Broackes, find systematic inconsistencies in Hume’s theory, but relate these to his need 
for a effective critique of religious belief (e.g. alleged lively perceptions of God) rather than to his view on 
personal identity. They also see the problems as symptomatic of an underlying tension in his philosophy 
between two empiricist tendencies, one phenomenological and the other naturalistically realist. Gorman 
disagrees with them, claiming that a more charitable reading of Hume’s (admittedly poorly expressed) words 
reveals a consistent view of belief as ‘a perception that has a certain feeling to the mind, which is the same as 
saying that it is a perception that is conceived in a certain manner’ (p.  99). MacNabb a lso accepts that belief 
may involve a characteristic feeling, but argues that what is really essential to Humean belief is firmness and 
steadiness (cf. the issue of force and vivacity in §4a above, and Loeb’s use of steadiness as a criterion of 
rational be lief in his papers mentioned in §6c below, a use anticipated by MacNabb in §3 of his chapter  6). 
Pears’ fourth chapter provides a philosophical critique of Hume’s theory in the Treatise , generally treating it as 
a unified whole; his next chapter then addre sses a problem highlighted by Bell, of why causation is the only one 
of Hume’s three associative relations able to generate belief. Finally, Bricke discusses Hume’s treatment of 
belief in the context of his theory of thought and judgement, and thereby rais es additional issues similar to some 
of those dealt with by Passmore’s chapter referenced in §5a above (note also that Passmore’s fifth chapter, 
especially from page 92 onwards, is highly relevant here).  
Smith and Jones’ introduction to the philosophy of m ind provides an accessible link between Hume’s 
theory of belief and modern discussions of the topic, in a chapter that focuses on Hume and Ryle:  
 Smith, Peter and Jones, O. R., The Philosophy of Mind  (Cambridge, New York and Melbourne: Cambridge 
University  Press, 1986), ch. 10  
In subsequent chapters they go on to develop a functionalist account of belief, drawing particularly on the 
influential work of Armstrong, but also making connexions with adjacent areas in the philosophy of mind.  
6(b)  Probability of Chances and Probability of Causes  
For an initial outline of Hume’s treatment of probability, see Garrett’s section on ‘Cognitive Psychology and 
Probability’ in Chapter  11 of this volume. Given the importance of the topic and its close historical associatio n 
with the celebrated Humean problem of induction, there have been surprisingly few significant discussions in 
the literature, the following being amongst the most notable exceptions:  
 Kemp Smith, Norman, The Philosophy of David Hume  (London: Macmillan, 19 41), ch. 19  
 MacNabb, D. G. C., David Hume: His Theory of Knowledge and Morality , 2nd edn. (Oxford: Blackwell, 
1966), ch.  6 
 Hacking, Ian, ‘Hume’s Species of Probability’, Philosophical Studies  33 (1978), 21 –37 
 Gower, Barry, ‘Hume on Probability’, British  Journal for the Philosophy of Science  42 (1991), 1 –19 
Kemp Smith provides a useful critical introduction to the account of probability in the Treatise , highlighting 
some of its crucial defects (Hume’s awareness of which, he suggests, may account for the b revity of the 
Enquiry  account), and explaining how Hume’s theory of belief leads him to treat both ‘probability of chances’ 
and ‘probability of causes’ as involving the same associationist mechanism. MacNabb likewise focuses on the 
Treatise , but gives more  attention to the philosophical issues than to the details of Hume’s own account, being 
(understandably) dismissive of some of its intricacies. Hacking praises Hume for noting the distinction between 
the two species of probability, but regrets that this in sight was then erased by his conflation of the two, and was 
not pursued further either by Hume himself or by subsequent pioneers of the theory of probability. Gower, 
unlike these other commentators, takes seriously the additive account of probability measu res suggested by 
Hume’s talk (at T 138 and E 127) of subtracting  the weight of evidence against a hypothesis from that in favour  20 (so that a probability of zero represents indifference rather than certain falsehood). As Gower points out, this 
distinctive ap proach to probability tends to be overlooked given the modern enthusiasm for analysing some of 
Hume’s arguments in standard Bayesian terms, but those responsible would no doubt see such analysis as 
charitable interpretation rather than oversight, given tha t Hume in the relevant contexts (e.g. T 127–42 and 
E 56–8) also uses terms implying proportionality, while the literal additive account is dubiously coherent 
(however Gower discusses its application to Hume’s essay on miracles in ‘David Hume and the Probab ility of 
Miracles’, Hume Studies  16 (1990), 17 –31). 
Contemporary philosophy of probability tends to be fearsomely technical, and additionally complicated by 
the multiplicity of different interpretations of the relevant concepts, some of which also go toget her with 
different formal treatments. For an informal philosophical discussion of probability concepts, see:  
 Mackie, J. L., Truth, Probability, and Paradox  (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973), ch. 5  
A straightforward classification of different formal approac hes to probability, together with a sketch of some 
influential previous taxonomies, is given by:  
 Weatherford, Roy, Philosophical Foundations of Probability Theory  (London, Boston and Melbourne: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1982), ch. 1  
Those with the technical  competence to dig deeper will find a useful survey of modern developments in:  
 Howson, Colin, ‘Theories of Probability’, British Journal for the Philosophy of Science  46 (1995), 1 –32 
To explore the relationship between probability and induction, a useful start is Gillies’ encyclopaedia article, 
which outlines the historical development of theories of probability, introducing some of the influential 
technical issues (such as the paradoxes of indifference, Dutch book arguments, Bayesian conditionalisation, a nd 
the Carnap –Hesse thesis) and relating them to the philosophy of induction:  
 Gillies, Donald  A., ‘Induction and Probability’, in G. H. R. Parkinson (ed.), An Encyclopaedia of 
Philosophy  (London and New York: Routledge, 1988), 179 –204 
Application of the probability calculus to inductive inference is problematic not only for Humean reasons 
(i.e. the apparent impossibility of a priori probability assignments, and sceptical doubts about inductive 
uniformity), but also because any such ‘inductive logic’ presu pposes a grasp of ‘natural kinds’ or real 
uniformities in nature and therefore cannot — unlike deductive logic — be purely formal. The classic 
presentation of this ‘new riddle of induction’ is:  
 Goodman, Nelson, Fact, Fiction, and Forecast , 4th edn. (Cambr idge, Massachusetts and London: Harvard 
University Press, 1983), ch.  3 
Skyrms’ introduction to inductive logic provides a useful discussion of Goodman’s ‘riddle’, as also of Mill’s 
methods of induction and of modern responses to Humean inductive scepticism . However in a brief discussion 
on the interpretation of probability he acknowledges the uncertain basis of the entire enterprise of inductive 
logic, given the resilience of the fundamental problems of induction:  
 Skyrms, Brian, Choice and Chance  (Belmont,  California: Dickenson Publishing Company, 1966)  
6(c)  Probability and Rationality in the Treatise  and the Enquiry  
Traditionally there has been little interest in those sections of the Treatise  (notably sections 9 –13 of Book  I 
Part iii) where Hume discusse s probabilistic inferential processes including a number that he considers dubious.  21 A fairly detailed survey of the various Humean belief -forming mechanisms is provided by §1 of Falkenstein’s 
paper listed later in this section, but for a brief review see:  
 Fogelin, Robert, Hume’s Skepticism in the Treatise of Human Nature  (London, Boston and Melbourne: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1985), ch. 5  
The most interesting of the mechanisms that Hume discusses is our tendency to seek and apply ‘general rules’, 
which thou gh often leading to unwarranted prejudices also provides the only solution to such prejudices 
through reflection upon them (a point expressed dramatically at T 150). Hearn’s well -known article surveys 
Hume’s treatment of general rules, showing how they per form an important role not only in his epistemology, 
but also in his philosophy of the passions and of morals:  
 Hearn Jr., Thomas K., ‘“General Rules” in Hume’s Treatise ’, Journal of the History of Philosophy  8 
(1970), 405 –22 
 The recent growth of interest  in Treatise  I. iii. 9–13 has resulted from an appreciation that neither Hume’s 
scepticism nor his naturalism are undiscriminating — within these sections but also elsewhere (e.g.  Enquiry  VIII 
to XII), he repeatedly endorses certain factual beliefs and met hods of enquiry (notably those characteristic of 
empirical science), while dismissing others as spurious (e.g. those characteristic of superstition). As long as the 
orthodox interpretation took Hume to be a deductivist sceptic regarding induction, such jud gements were 
themselves typically dismissed as mere inconsistencies on his part, but once it became generally accepted that 
he is no crude deductivist (see §5b and §5c above), the question of whether his philosophy can sustain a 
plausible theory of normati ve discrimination came to prominence. However the suggestion that it might do so is 
in some tension not only with his inductive scepticism, but also with his central thesis that belief is involuntary. 
In Chapter  14 Norton seeks to alleviate this latter ten sion, by showing how even if beliefs are indeed 
‘proximately involuntary’, it is still possible for reflective philosophical doubt to alter the context in which they 
arise and thus to influence what we believe. Norton develops this position further in his book, arguing that a 
proper recognition of the role of reflective thought in Hume’s philosophy comprehensively undermines Kemp 
Smith’s influential claim that Hume’s key principle is the subordination of reason to feeling:  
 Norton, David Fate, David Hume: C ommon -Sense Moralist, Sceptical Metaphysician  (Princeton and 
Guildford: Princeton University Press, 1982), ch.  5 part 2  
Passmore’s paper ‘Hume and the Ethics of Belief’ takes a similar approach, explaining how Hume’s theory of 
belief, whilst implying its i nvoluntary nature, can nevertheless allow us to have some control over what we 
believe by adopting a ‘belief policy’ involving such things as attention to and critical examination of evidence. 
Hence normative recommendations become at least a meaningful po ssibility, though the third chapter of 
Passmore’s book casts doubt on whether such recommendations can be given any adequate basis using the 
resources at Hume’s disposal in the Treatise  (in particular his notion of general rules):  
 Passmore, John, Hume’s I ntentions , 3rd edn. (London: Duckworth, 1980), ch. 3 and the appendix entitled 
‘Hume and the Ethics of Belief’, whose original version appeared in George P.  Morice (ed.), David Hume: 
Bicentenary Papers  (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1977), 77 –92 
Other discussions of the Treatise  treatment of probability are more optimistic, seeing it as providing not only a 
rich source of apparently normative judgements, but also a plausible Humean attempt at a theoretical foundation 
for such judgements based on th e empirical assessment of our reasoning methods. However as the following 
summaries make clear, there is relatively little agreement regarding the nature of this empirical assessment, and 
the criteria to which it answers:   22  Winters, Barbara, ‘Hume’s Argumen t for the Superiority of Natural Instinct’, Dialogue  20 (1981), 635 –43; 
repr. in Tweyman (1995), vol. iii, 262 –70 
Winters takes Hume’s problem to be that of justifying a preference for the ‘general and more establish’d 
properties of the imagination’ over t he ‘trivial properties of the fancy’ (cf. Immerwahr’s paper in §3c above). 
Hume’s preference for the former, she suggests, is founded on two main considerations, namely their relative 
efficiency (deriving from their immediacy, irresistibility and durabilit y) and their naturalness (which makes 
them easy and satisfying to apply).  
 Costa, M.J., ‘Hume and Justified Belief’, Canadian Journal of Philosophy  11 (1981), 219 –28; repr. in 
Tweyman (1995), vol. i, 174 –82 
Costa shares Winters’ conception of Hume’s proble m, but sees his preference for disciplined causal reasoning 
(that which conforms to his ‘rules by which to judge of causes and effects’) as founded on its superior reliability 
compared with other inferential mechanisms. He ends by suggesting that Hume’s ph ilosophy thus contains the 
seeds of modern ‘externalist’ or ‘reliabilist’ epistemology, which likewise assesses epistemic justification 
according to the reliability of the belief -forming mechanisms involved.  
  Baier, Annette C., A Progress of Sentiments: R eflections on Hume’s Treatise (Cambridge, Massachusetts 
and London: Harvard University Press, 1991), ch. 4  
Baier, in tune with the overall theme of her book, takes Hume’s approval of causal norms of reasoning to derive 
from their reflexive application, whe reby causal reasoning is applied to vindicate the very causal norms that it 
employs. Pithily summarised, ‘ Successful reflexivity is normativity ’ (pp.  99–100). (The third part of Winkler’s 
paper referenced in §5c above follows Baier in emphasising the role of reflection in Hume’s ‘ normalising of the 
natural ’ (p. 204), but in Winkler’s view Hume fails to resolve the underlying tension between his inductive 
scepticism and his desire for normative discrimination.)  
 Loeb, Louis E., ‘Hume on Stability, Justificat ion, and Unphilosophical Probability’, Journal of the History 
of Philosophy  33 (1995), 101 –32 
 Loeb, Louis E., ‘Instability and Uneasiness in Hume’s Theories of Belief and Justification’, British 
Journal for the History of Philosophy  3 (1995), 301 –27 
Loeb views Hume’s discussions of ‘unphilosophical probability’ as fitting into a general framework of 
inductive assessment of inferential processes, but differs from Baier in taking the appropriate criterion to be 
stability of belief rather than successful refl exivity. In his second paper, he explains the motivation for seeking 
such stability as being the avoidance of uneasiness, and thus attributes Hume with a theory of justification 
which has close affinities to Peirce’s theory of belief.  
 Wilson, Fred, ‘Hume’ s Defence of Causal Inference’, Dialogue  22 (1983), 661 –94 
 Wilson, Fred, Hume’s Defence of Causal Inference  (Toronto, Buffalo and London: University of Toronto 
Press, 1997), especially ch. 2 §3  
Wilson, on Hume’s behalf, appeals to the (arguable) principle  that ‘must implies ought’ to justify the basic 
practice of inductive causal reasoning over which we have no choice. He then interprets Hume’s discussion of 
the various particular mechanisms of causal inference — and the formulating of ‘general rules’ abou t these 
mechanisms — as intended to yield an inductive assessment of their capacity to satisfy the natural passion of 
curiosity, this passion providing our motive for reasoning in accordance with those mechanisms that have 
proved most reliable.   23  Falkenstei n, Lorne, ‘Naturalism, Normativity, and Scepticism in Hume’s Account of Belief’, Hume Studies  
23 (1997), 29 –72; repr. in Owen (2000), 219 –62 
Falkenstein follows Wilson in focusing on Hume’s appeal to general rules, but puts particular emphasis on the 
formu lation of second -order rules that assess the reliability of first -order rules. Such second -order reflection 
requires time and effort, suggesting that the relatively weak passion of curiosity may be insufficient to motivate 
it. Instead, Falkenstein argues, Hume sees such reflection as being motivated by the contemplation of sceptical 
arguments, which initially undermine all our beliefs but from which some beliefs — notably those that are 
frequently reinforced in common life — are quickly able to recover. Thu s it is that the Pyrrhonian arguments 
lead naturally to both normative discrimination and mitigated scepticism.  
All of the above summarised accounts imply that at least some of the material of Treatise  I. iii. 9, 10 and 
13 is crucial for the understanding of Hume’s attitude to science and scepticism, and hence that a fundamental 
constituent of his philosophy is almost entirely absent from his later writings. Relatively few commentators 
have tried to avoid this uncomfortable conclusion by finding an adequate  basis for normative discrimination 
within the text of the Enquiry  and Dialogues , something which I attempt in §11 of Chapter  4 of this volume 
(a similar account, but focusing more on the Treatise  and stressing common elements with several of the 
discussio ns above, is in §13 of my paper mentioned in §5b above). What I take to be the key passage from the 
Enquiry  is Hume’s suggestion that science involves ‘nothing but the reflections of common life, methodized 
and corrected’ ( E 162), a passage which is — perhaps significantly — very clearly echoed in the Dialogues  
(D 134), and which Noxon likewise sees as expressing a general ‘Principle of Methodological Consistency’ (see 
the reference to his book in §3c above). A quite different approach, but one which also d raws on both the 
Treatise  and the Enquiry , is taken by:  
 Ferreira, M. Jamie, ‘Hume’s Naturalism — “Proof” and Practice’, Philosophical Quarterly  35 (1985), 45 –
57; repr. in Tweyman (1995), vol. iii, 271 –83 
Ferreira argues that Hume’s distinction between mer e ‘probabilities’ and ‘proofs’ ( T 124, E 56‡n.) is 
epistemologically very significant, separating those beliefs which in Hume’s view can reasonably be doubted 
from those which cannot. She thus places Hume within a tradition of ‘reasonable doubt’ naturalism , a tradition 
whose progress from Wilkins to Newman she recounts in her book Scepticism and Reasonable Doubt  (Oxford 
and New York: Clarendon Press, 1986), and which she there contrasts (p.  234) with both ‘sceptical’ naturalism 
and ‘justifying’ naturalism. Her interpretation has the implication that Hume is rather close to Reid — the 
central representative of this tradition — in ruling out any reasonable ground for doubt about the fundamental 
beliefs derived from our natural faculties. For a strongly contras ting view, to which Ferreira herself alludes, see 
part 1 of Norton’s chapter mentioned earlier in this section.  
Moving on to contemporary discussions of human rationality, the question of how far our natural 
inferential methods conform to theoretical ideal s has attracted much attention since the work of Kahneman and 
Tversky, who devised a range of experiments revealing various ‘heuristics’ that we use in our thinking, and 
‘biases’ to which these lead. Their main papers are collected in:  
 Kahneman, D., Slovi c, P., and Tversky, A. (eds.), Judgement Under Uncertainty: Heuristics and Biases  
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1982)  
There is, however, debate over how some of the results of Kahneman and Tversky should be interpreted (as 
exemplified by Cohen’s criticism of their taxicab example, discussed by Owen in Chapter  12). Both their results 
and some of this debate are summarised in the chapter on probability in a book whose theme is precisely what 
Hume addressed in the sections of the Treatise  that we hav e been discussing: the subtle interplay between 
rational norms and our inferential practices.   24  Manktelow, K. I. and Over, D. E., Inference and Understanding: A Philosophical and Psychological 
Perspective  (London and New York: Routledge, 1990), ch.  7 
6(d)  The Reason of Animals  
Despite its importance for his anti -rationalist and naturalising philosophical project, very little has been written 
on Hume’s discussion of animals (indeed not one paper out of nearly two hundred in Tweyman’s six volumes is 
devoted t o the topic!). What little has been written, moreover, has tended to focus on the moral rather than the 
epistemological aspects of Hume’s position. With this reservation, a useful recent paper is:  
 Pitson, Antony E., ‘The Nature of Humean Animals’, Hume St udies  19 (1993), 301 –16 
Hume’s view of animal and human reason as differing in degree rather than in their essential nature obviously 
fits very comfortably with the theory of evolution, and it is interesting to note that Enquiry  IX is explicitly 
mentioned by Darwin in a manuscript dating from the time when he was developing that theory:  
 Huntley, William B., ‘David Hume and Charles Darwin’, Journal of the History of Ideas  33 (1972),  
457–70 
In this context it is understandable that the book on Hume which mos t emphasises the topic was written over a 
century ago by the man known as ‘Darwin’s bulldog’:  
 Huxley, T. H., Hume  (London: Macmillan, 1886), ch. 5, ‘the mental phenomena of animals’  
Since then the overwhelming success of evolutionary theory as an explanat ory framework for biology has, of 
course, led to its almost universal acceptance in scientific circles. Yet perhaps surprisingly, Hume’s bold claim 
that animals can reason in a way closely analogous to ourselves remains controversial. For an engaging accou nt 
of some striking recent evidence in favour of Hume’s position, see:  
 Stamp Dawkins, Marian, Through our eyes only?  (Oxford, New York and Tokyo: Oxford University 
Press, 1998)  
7.  Causation  
7(a)  Hume’s Account of Causation  
In Chapter  7, Craig describes Hume’s hunt for the impression of necessary connexion, and introduces some of 
the complex issues raised by it and by Hume’s notorious two definitions of cause. Two other useful discussions 
of Hume’s corresponding account in the Treatise , providing differen t perspectives on some of the same issues 
but also raising some new ones, are:  
 Stroud, Barry, Hume  (London and Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1977), ch. 4  
 Noonan, Harold W., Hume on Knowledge  (London and New York: Routledge, 1999), 140 –57 
In the course of his discussion, Stroud influentially takes on the question of what Hume’s elusive impression of 
necessary connexion might be, concluding that it is just a certain feeling that accompanies our causal 
inferences, which because of its simplicity must be in definable. His view is critically examined at length, in the 
context of a general treatment of Hume’s theory of causation, by:  
 Pears, David, Hume’s System  (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1990), ch. 7   25 Stroud responds to Pears in a paper whic h considers the more general issue of whether any Humean internal 
impression (such as of necessity, or of moral sentiments) can coherently be projected onto the world in the way 
that Hume supposes (the problem being that such projection takes for granted t he prior availability within the 
mind of something which in fact seems to make sense only after the projection has taken place):  
 Stroud, Barry, ‘“Gilding or Staining” the World with “Sentiments” and “Phantasms”’, Hume Studies  19 
(1993), 253 –72; repr. in R upert Read and Kenneth A. Richman (eds.), The New Hume Debate  (London and 
New York: Routledge, 2000), 16 –30 
 Hume’s notorious ‘two definitions of cause’ have provoked numerous discussions over many years 
because the two apparently conflict. Craig’s respons e is to demote them from the status of strict definitions  of 
causation, and to see them instead as general encapsulations of two different aspects of Hume’s conclusions 
about our causal beliefs. A less compromising approach is taken by Beauchamp, who sees Hume’s definitions 
as capturing two different theories of causation, which Hume tries in vain to reconcile:  
 Beauchamp, Tom, ‘Hume’s Two Theories of Causation’, Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie  55 (1973), 
281–300; repr. in Tweyman (1995), vol. iii, 30 3–21 
In his later book with Rosenberg the development of this position is more extensive, and provides useful 
detailed discussion of a number of previous commentators’ views:  
 Beauchamp, Tom and Rosenberg, Alexander, Hume and the Problem of Causation  (Oxfo rd and New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1981), ch. 1  
A different perspective is brought to the issue by Russell, who sees Hume’s two definitions as giving accounts 
of causation as it exists in the material world and in our perceptions respectively:  
 Russ ell, Paul, ‘Hume’s “Two Definitions” of Cause and the Ontology of “Double Existence”’, Hume 
Studies  10 (1984), 1 –25; repr. in Tweyman (1995), vol. iii, 416 –33 
 Russell, Paul, Freedom and Moral Sentiment  (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1995),  
ch. 2 
Another insightful recent analysis first gives an overview of the various types of position that commentators 
have taken on the two definitions, and the general evidence for and against them. It then presents Hume as 
having a thoroughly coherent pos ition based around his theory of abstract ideas and their definition:  
 Garrett, Don, Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy  (Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1997), ch. 5  
Perhaps the most obvious objection to Garrett is that Hume does n ot explicitly mention his theory of abstract 
ideas in the context of his two definitions; moreover that theory does not feature at all in the Enquiry  (except in 
a footnote at E 158), although the two definitions are just as prominent there as in the Treati se. Much of what 
Garrett says, however — in particular, his claim that the two definitions are co -extensive if properly understood 
— is plausible quite independently of any such connexion with abstract ideas.  
It should be noted that Beauchamp, Rosenberg, R ussell and Garrett all focus predominantly on the 
Treatise , so parts of their discussions are less directly appropriate to the Enquiry  where Hume’s two definitions 
are somewhat different. Their most important omission is any mention of the puzzle concernin g Hume’s ‘other 
words’ appended to his first definition in the Enquiry  (‘Or in other words where, if the first object had not been, 
the second never had existed .’ — E 76), which have often been interpreted (e.g. by Vesey in the article listed in 
§8b below)  in a counterfactual manner that seems straightforwardly to conflict with the definition that they  26 supposedly paraphrase. For a statement of the simplest solution to this puzzle, which interprets the conditional 
as merely tensed rather than counterfactual,  see: 
 Jacobson, Anne Jaap, ‘From Cognitive Science to a Post -Cartesian Text’, in Rupert Read and Kenneth A. 
Richman (eds.), The New Hume Debate  (London and New York: Routledge, 2000), 156 –66 
In addition to her comments on the two definitions, Jacobson rai ses important criticisms of Stroud’s view of the 
impression of necessity. Her more general thesis that the Enquiry  is to be read in a postmodern fashion, as 
developing different (and incompatible) perspectives rather than seeking for determinate conclusion s, is 
interestingly provocative but likely to be seen by most Hume interpreters as a premature counsel of despair.  
7(b)  Humean Theories of Causation  
Hume’s theory of causation has become so influential that philosophical discussions of his views tend at t he 
same time to be contributions to the contemporary philosophy of causation. This can make entry into the 
literature rather daunting, but fortunately a recent student text provides a relatively gentle introduction to some 
of the major issues:  
 Dicker, Geo rges, Hume’s Epistemology & Metaphysics  (London and New York: Routledge, 1998), ch.  4 
The outstanding modern contribution to the philosophy of causation in the Humean tradition is:  
 Mackie, J. L., The Cement of the Universe  (Oxford and New York: Clarendon  Press, 1974)  
The paperback edition (published in 1980) adds a useful preface, summarising Mackie’s position and the book’s 
contents. Though inspired by Hume, Mackie departs significantly from what he takes to be the Humean position 
(but his detailed analy sis of Hume’s arguments is questionable — see Morris’s article in §5b above). Another 
major book, more textually sensitive and faithful to Hume than Mackie’s though less philosophically 
groundbreaking, has already been mentioned in §5c and §7a above:  
 Beau champ, Tom and Rosenberg, Alexander, Hume and the Problem of Causation  (Oxford and New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1981)  
Beauchamp and Rosenberg present a rational reconstruction of Hume’s view (ridding him of the ‘two 
definitions’ inconsistency that th ey ascribe to him), which they then defend against Mackie’s criticisms and 
others. One author discussed both by them and by Mackie is Anscombe, whose Cambridge inaugural lecture is 
probably the best known radical attack on the entire Humean position:  
 Ansc ombe, G. E. M., Causality and Determination  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1971); repr. 
in Metaphysics and the Philosophy of Mind: Collected Philosophical Papers Vol. II  (Oxford: Blackwell, 
1981), 133 –47 
Anscombe’s lecture is also reprinted in a c ollection which starts from Mackie’s seminal paper ‘Causes and 
Conditions’ (1965) and contains other important articles on the nature of causation:  
 Sosa, Ernest and Tooley, Michael (eds.), Causation  (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 
1993)  
7(c)  Causal Realism and the ‘New Hume’  
In Chapter 8 of this volume, Galen Strawson presents a summarised account — with particular reference to the 
Enquiry  — of the substantial case for Hume’s causal realism which he made at far greater length in:  
 Strawson,  Galen, The Secret Connexion  (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 1989)   27 Strawson’s book is given an elegant summary and a judicious critical assessment by:  
 Broackes, Justin, ‘Did Hume hold a Regularity Theory of Causation?’, British Journal for the Hist ory of 
Philosophy  1 (1993), 99 –114 
Broackes packs a multitude of points into his fifteen pages, making this a particularly efficient introduction to 
the issues which, while generally disputing the evidence for the causal realist interpretation, nevertheles s 
expresses sufficient sympathy with it to conclude that Hume probably had no completely settled view 
(a conclusion interestingly similar to the one Broackes draws about Hume’s theory of belief in Chapter  6). 
Although he developed his position quite indepe ndently of these other authors, Strawson’s book 
acknowledges that similar views had already been presented (albeit in very different style) by:  
 Wright, John P., The Sceptical Realism of David Hume  (Manchester: Manchester University Press, 1983), 
ch. 4  
 Livingston, Donald W., Hume’s Philosophy of Common Life  (Chicago and London: University of Chicago 
Press, 1984), ch. 6  
Less detailed but perhaps more widely known than the earlier work of Wright and Livingston, Craig’s chapter 
on Hume (from parts of which hi s essay in Chapter  7 of this volume is developed), presents a general picture of 
his thought which is particularly congenial for the causal realist interpretation:  
 Craig, Edward, The Mind of God and the Works of Man  (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 1987), 
ch. 2  
The first chapter of Craig’s book is also of great interest, giving a survey of rationalist writings prior to Hume 
that exemplify the ‘Image of God’ conception of human reason which Craig sees as Hume’s principal target. 
The upshot of Craig’s thesis is that the traditional reading of Hume as a positivist is totally wrong -headed; far 
preferable is the kind of ‘sceptical realism’ attributed to him by Wright and Strawson.  
Together with Blackburn’s article in Chapter  9, which defends a ‘projectivis t’ reading of Hume, the most 
influential critique of the causal realist interpretation is:  
 Winkler, Kenneth  P., ‘The New Hume’, Philosophical Review  100 (1991), 541 –79; repr. in Owen (2000), 
347–85 and in Rupert Read and Kenneth A. Richman (eds.), The New  Hume Debate  (London and New 
York: Routledge, 2000), 52 –74 
The reprint of Winkler’s paper in The New Hume Debate  adds a postscript entitled ‘Intelligibility and the 
Theory of Ideas’ (pages 74 –87). Also in this recent collection are a number of new papers, including a direct 
reply to many of the points made by Winkler:  
 Wright, John P., ‘Hume’s Causal Realism: Recovering a Traditional Interpretation’, in Rupert Read and 
Kenneth A. Richman (eds.), The New Hume Debate  (London and New York: Routledge, 2000), 88 –99 
Three other new papers in the collection, by Craig, Bell, and Flage, are of more specific interest in the causal 
realism debate:  
 Craig, Edward, ‘Projectivist and Realist?’, in Rupert Read and Kenneth A. Richman (eds.), The New Hume 
Debate  (London and New York: Routledge, 2000), 113 –21 
Craig here suggests that Hume may be both a projectivist and a realist about causation — projectivist about our 
everyday understanding of it (founded on ‘the Imagination’), but realist about causes in nature. He then, 
however, goes on to question whether such realism may be just as incompatible with Hume’s epistemology as it 
apparently is with his theory of ideas, because neither ‘Reason’ nor ‘the Senses’ can provide it with any basis  28 (‘Reason’ here being rejected as a bas is simply because uncaused regularity is conceivable). But since Craig 
detects traces, at the end of Enquiry  V, of a non-demonstrative argument for realism based on the regularity of 
nature, his negative conclusion might be avoidable by adopting one of the  non-rationalistic conceptions of 
reason favoured by most of the works discussed in §5c above.  
 Bell, Martin, ‘Sceptical Doubts concerning Hume’s Causal Realism’, in Rupert Read and Kenneth A. 
Richman (eds.), The New Hume Debate  (London and New York: Routl edge, 2000), 122 –37 
Bell attacks both Strawson’s book and Wright’s response to Winkler. Against Strawson he alleges a conflict 
between causal realism and Hume’s inductive scepticism, given Strawson’s apparent endorsement of the idea 
(alluded to by Craig) t hat realist causation can explain, and hence can be reasonably inferred from, the 
regularity of nature (but see my Introduction note 15 for doubts whether Strawson is indeed committed, as Bell 
implies, to what Blackburn in Chapter  9 calls a ‘straitjacket’) . Against Wright, Bell continues a debate on the 
interpretation of Hume’s divergences from Malebranche, which started with:  
 Wright, John P., ‘Hume’s Criticism of Malebranche’s Theory of Causation: A Lesson in the 
Historiography of Philosophy’, in Stuart B rown (ed.), Nicolas Malebranche: His Philosophical Critics and 
Successors  (Assen, Netherlands: Van Gorcum, 1991), 116 –30 
 Bell, Martin, ‘Hume and Causal Power: the Influences of Malebranche and Newton’, British Journal for 
the History of Philosophy  5 (1997 ), 67–86 
Wright (like Strawson in ch. 11 of his book) sees Hume as adopting Malebranche’s aprioristic criterion of 
causation — as what would license a priori inference from cause to effect — and takes his divergence from 
Malebranche to involve (sceptical) realism about causes so conceived. Bell sees Hume as rejecting 
Malebranche’s entire notion, and replacing it with one that can be applied only on the basis of experience and 
whose instances are metaphysically quite distinct. However Bell ends his later pap er by observing a resulting 
tension in Hume’s thought, since such distinctness sits uneasily with the generality that is characteristic of 
necessity. This tension, Bell suggests, may explain the acknowledged imperfection in Hume’s two definitions 
of cause (T 170, E 76–7), which New Humeans have taken as strong evidence of causal realism.  
 Flage, Daniel, ‘Relative Ideas Re -Viewed’, in Rupert Read and Kenneth A. Richman (eds.), The New 
Hume Debate  (London and New York: Routledge, 2000), 138 –55 
If Hume believe s in truly objective  causal powers, then he must be able to maintain a belief about something for 
which — as he shows in Enquiry  VII — there is no corresponding impression (and hence, according to his Copy 
Principle, no idea). Strawson, Wright and other Ne w Humeans have seen the solution to this puzzle in his 
notion of ‘relative ideas’ (cf. §10a below), but Flage, author of a number of earlier articles on the notion, here 
argues that it is inadequate to play such a role. He draws attention to similar notion s in the work of Locke, 
Berkeley, Arnauld and Reid, which however require clear understanding of the relation involved, something 
unachievable in the current case. He also argues that there is no evidence that Hume’s ‘relative ideas’ can 
support a belief, for in the Treatise  and Enquiry , force and vivacity attach only to positive ideas.  
8.  Liberty and Necessity  
8(a)  Hume’s Treatment of Liberty and Necessity  
Given its enormous importance for Hume, it is surprising that the literature on his treatment of li berty and 
necessity is so meagre. Moreover what little has been written has tended to focus on his discussion in the 
Treatise , which (as Botterill explains in Chapter  10) is significantly different from that in the Enquiry  and in  29 some ways quite misleading . In particular, the distinction between two types of liberty in the Treatise  has 
encouraged many past commentators (for example Stroud in ch. 7 of his 1977 book) to interpret Hume as a 
straightforward classical compatibilist, a view exploded both by Botte rill and by Russell (see his 1995 book 
below). Kemp Smith’s short but influential chapter on the topic, though useful as an account of Hume’s main 
points in the Treatise , exemplifies this misleading emphasis on the two liberties:  
 Kemp Smith, Norman, The P hilosophy of David Hume  (London: Macmillan, 1941), ch. 20  
For the student of the Enquiry , perhaps the most interesting of the traditional compatibilist accounts is:  
 Flew, Antony, Hume’s Philosophy of Belief  (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1961), ch. 7  
 The recent recognition that Hume’s compatibilism is more distinctive and subtle than previously assumed, 
and rooted at least as much in his naturalist project as in conceptual concerns, is due largely to Russell’s work, 
brought together in what is undoubted ly the most important book on the topic:  
 Russell, Paul, Freedom and Moral Sentiment  (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1995)  
Most relevant for the interpretation of the Enquiry  are chapters 1, 3, 4, and 7 (chapter 2 has already been 
mentioned in §7a above). Rejecting, like Botterill, the traditional focus on the contrast between the two types of 
‘liberty’ mentioned in the Treatise , Russell emphasises instead Hume’s analyses of necessity and of the 
conditions for moral responsibility. His densel y argued work provides the best available account of how all 
these important strands in Hume’s philosophy weave together. For another perspective on Hume’s view of the 
relationships between liberty, necessity, and moral responsibility, see:  
 Bricke, J., ‘H ume, Freedom to Act, and Personal Evaluation’, History of Philosophy Quarterly  5 (1988), 
141–56; repr. in Tweyman (1995), vol. iv, 175 –91 
Garrett’s recent book provides a general problem -orientated discussion of liberty and necessity, nicely 
complementing Russell’s approach (though unfortunately not discussing it) by focusing in turn on specific 
interpretative difficulties rather than explicitly developing an integrated overall perspective:  
 Garrett, Don, Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy  (Oxfor d and New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1997), ch. 6  
Garrett highlights a range of apparent inconsistencies and other problems that various commentators have 
identified in Hume’s account, and then with characteristic ingenuity proceeds to explain them awa y. 
8(b)  Free Will and Determinism  
There is, of course, a far wider range of material on the general philosophical topic of free will and determinism 
than on the detailed interpretation of Hume’s position. A very brief introduction, approaching the topic t hrough 
Hume’s Enquiry  in a (now rather dated) Wittgensteinian spirit, is provided by:  
 Vesey, Godfrey, ‘Hume on Liberty and Necessity’, in Godfrey Vesey (ed.), Philosophers Ancient and 
Modern  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986), 111 –27 
A particul arly clear defence of Humean compatibilism, which helpfully introduces the contributions of 
contemporary philosophers such as Van Inwagen and Frankfurt, occurs in a chapter of a book on artificial 
intelligence whose aim is to refute the general claim that a robot could not be free:  
 Copeland, Jack, Artifical Intelligence: A Philosophical Introduction  (Oxford and Cambridge, 
Massachusetts: Blackwell, 1993), ch.  7  30 Honderich provides a more detailed but still introductory discussion, which (though misinterpreti ng Hume in 
the traditional manner) sets out many of the surrounding issues with great clarity while developing his own 
‘theory of determinism’, a theory which rejects both compatibilism and incompatibilism:  
 Honderich, Ted, How Free Are You?  (Oxford and Ne w York: Oxford University Press, 1993)  
The concept of free will is intimately connected with that of intentional action, and both impinge on moral 
theory. Mackie provides an accessible general treatment of these issues, from the viewpoint of a broadly 
Hume an approach to morality:  
 Mackie, J.L., Ethics: Inventing Right and Wrong  (Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1977), ch.  9 
 Turning now to more detailed treatments, the following are amongst the most influential book -length 
presentations of the case for compatibilism  and for libertarianism respectively:  
 Dennett, Daniel C., Elbow Room: The Varieties of Free Will Worth Wanting  (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 
1984)  
 Van Inwagen, Peter, An Essay on Free Will  (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1983)  
A contrasting and very uncompromising  approach can be found in Galen Strawson’s book on the topic, which 
rejects both Humean compatibilism and traditional libertarianism on the ground that irrespective  of the truth or 
falsity of determinism, our belief that we are truly free and responsible a gents is false:  
 Strawson, Galen, Freedom and Belief  (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 1986)  
Other contemporary approaches are represented in Watson’s useful collection, including two of the best -known 
compatibilist contributions, ‘Freedom of the Will  and the Concept of a Person’ by Harry Frankfurt, and 
‘Freedom and Resentment’ by Peter Strawson (the latter of which is discussed at some length in chapter  5 of 
Russell’s book, finding illuminating parallels with Hume):  
 Watson, Gary (ed.), Free Will  (Oxf ord and New York: Oxford University Press, 1982)  
Understanding how all these different views relate to each other is a complex matter, but the first part of a 
recent book — written from a libertarian perspective — draws the threads of contemporary debate i nto a 
coherent pattern:  
 Kane, Robert, The Significance of Free Will  (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1996), part  I 
 Hume ends his section on liberty and necessity by hinting that his compatibilist account leaves God as the 
author of sin. Ken ny provides a contemporary discussion of this issue, with the same conclusion:  
 Kenny, Anthony, The God of the Philosophers  (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 1979), ch. 6  
9.  Hume’s Philosophy of Religion  
The best general account of Hume’s philosophy of religion is:  
 Gaskin, J. C. A., Hume’s Philosophy of Religion , 2nd edn. (Basingstoke and London: Macmillan, 1988)  
The same author provides an excellent overview in Norton’s Cambridge Companion : 
 Gaskin, J. C. A., ‘Hume on Religion’, in David Fate Norton  (ed.), The Cambridge Companion to Hume  
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993), 313 –344  31 Leaving aside Gaskin’s book, probably the most widely respected contribution on the topic is Kemp Smith’s 
editorial material in his standard edition of the Dialo gues, discussed in §2c above:  
 David Hume, Dialogues concerning Natural Religion  (1779), ed. Norman Kemp Smith, 2nd edn. 
(Edinburgh: Nelson, 1947)  
Penelhum’s 1975 book on Hume is unusual in giving explicit attention to the arguments of Enquiry  XI as well 
as those of Enquiry  X, offering a convenient summary and a brief philosophical discussion of each:  
 Penelhum, Terence, Hume  (London and Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1975), ch.  8 especially 175 –80 
 When reading Hume’s writings on religion, it is important to rema in alert to the possibility of irony in his 
apparent declarations of theistic belief (e.g. in the concluding paragraph of Enquiry  Sections VIII and X). 
Berman’s discussion of contemporary deist writings sets Hume in context, showing how widely practised — 
and widely recognised — was the art of ‘theological lying’:  
 Berman, David, ‘Deism, Immortality, and the Art of Theological Lying’, in J. A. Leo Lemay (ed.), Deism, 
Masonry, and the Enlightenment  (London and Toronto: Associated University Presses, 1987), 6 1–78 
Fieser illustrates how this context was taken for granted by Hume’s early critics, who clearly recognised the 
need to ‘decode’ his writings in order to reveal their hidden meaning:  
 Fieser, James, ‘Hume’s Concealed Attack on Religion and His Early Cri tics’, Journal of Philosophical 
Research  20 (1995), 83 –101 
Given this background, it is a genuine puzzle to identify Hume’s real views on religion, a puzzle which has 
generated a great deal of literature especially in relation to the interpretation of his Dialogues  (as discussed in 
§9b below). It seems clear that Hume himself held at most a very minimal deism, which raises the question of 
why he should have devoted so much attention to the topic. Noxon suggests that his fascination with it derived 
from his perception of religious belief itself as an extraordinary phenomenon:  
 Noxon, James, ‘Hume’s Concern with Religion’, in K. R. Merrill and R. S. Shahan (eds.), David Hume: 
Many -sided Genius  (Norman, Oklahoma: University of Oklahoma Press, 1976), 59 –82; repr . in Tweyman 
(1995), vol. v, 3 –25 
The most obvious alternative explanation — that Hume was motivated by the desire to oppose superstition — is 
rejected by Noxon (following Wollheim) by appeal to Hume’s pessimism and conservative temperament. Hume 
was indee d pessimistic about the power of philosophy to undermine the religious commitments of ‘the vulgar’, 
but this does not imply that he had no such reformative ambition in respect of his more discerning readers. 
Quite the contrary is suggested by his manifesto  in Enquiry  I, which explicitly advocates that we ‘cultivate true 
metaphysics .  . . in order to destroy the false and adulterate’ ( E 12), and also by his posthumously published 
essay ‘Of Suicide’, whose first paragraph describes philosophy as a ‘sovereign antidote .  . . to superstition and 
false religion’ (see §3 of Chapter  1 of this volume for other relevant references). Moreover his concern with 
religion was very far from being the relatively detached curiosity suggested by Noxon, though as Siebert shows,  
his passionate moral opposition to religion is more clearly manifested in the History of England  than in his 
philosophical writings:  
 Siebert, Donald T., The Moral Animus of David Hume  (London and Toronto: Associated University 
Presses, 1990), ch.  2  32 9(a)  Miracles  
The historical context of Hume’s essay on miracles has become much better understood over recent years. 
Chapter 8 of Gaskin’s book (listed above) is useful, but the most detailed treatment of both the prior debate and 
of Hume’s arguments is:  
 Burns, R. M., The Great Debate on Miracles  (London and Toronto: Associated University Presses, 1981)  
Two recent articles are also particularly noteworthy:  
 Wootton, David, ‘Hume’s “Of Miracles”: Probability and Irreligion’, in M. A. Stewart (ed.), Studies in the 
Philosophy of the Scottish Enlightenment  (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 1990), 191 –229 
 Stewart, M. A., ‘Hume’s Historical View of Miracles’, in M. A. Stewart and John P.  Wright (eds.), Hume 
and Hume’s Connexions  (Edinburgh: Edinburgh Universit y Press, 1994), 171 –200 
Gaskin locates Hume’s essay within an ongoing English debate centring around Thomas Sherlock’s famous 
Tryal of the Witnesses of the Resurrection , in which Sherlock defended the Gospel resurrection stories as 
historically well -founde d. Burns discusses a wider variety of English authors, finding parallels to the arguments 
of both Sherlock and Hume which make it harder to identify Sherlock as Hume’s specific target, and also 
suggest that Hume’s arguments may be less original than is oft en supposed (with similarities to those of deists 
such as William Wollaston). Wootton stresses the influence on Hume’s thinking of less familiar French sources, 
which Hume is likely to have encountered during his time in France working on the Treatise . Stewart, while 
acknowledging both French and English sources, argues that Locke was the primary influence on Hume’s 
thinking about the topic. Locke’s views are put into context by Jones, who surveys how the topics of testimony 
and miracles were treated by Bri tish philosophers from Bacon to Hume:  
 Jones, Peter, Hume’s Sentiments  (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1982), 45 –56 
There are numerous discussions of the philosophical merits of what has been, ever since its publication, 
one of Hume’s most controve rsial arguments. Some early responses and relevant reviews have recently become 
easily available in a useful collection (see Hume Studies  24 (1998), 198 for details):  
 Tweyman, Stanley (ed.), Hume on Miracles  (Bristol: Thoemmes Press, 1996)  
One particularl y entertaining piece, unfortunately long since out of print and not included in Tweyman’s 
collection, is a spoof by Archbishop Richard Whately which was initially published (anonymously) in 1819. 
Here Whately aims to demonstrate the absurdity of Hume’s cri teria for judging miracle stories by showing that 
the history of Napoleon’s exploits would, on these criteria, appear equally incredible:  
 Whately, Richard, Historic Doubts relative to Napoleon Buonaparte  (London: John W. Parker and Son, 
1859)  
 Moving on t o modern interpretations and assessments of Hume’s argument, the first section of Garrett’s 
Chapter  11 gives some indication of their large number and considerable variety, and his lists of references can 
easily be used to identify works which diverge from  his interpretation in particular respects. Rather than 
duplicate this resource, I here pick out only a few highlights from the immense literature. To begin with those 
that have attained ‘classic’ status, the following short general discussions of Hume’s e ssay are still well worth 
reading, even though they may look slightly dated in the light of more recent scholarship:  
 Broad, C. D., ‘Hume’s Theory of the Credibility of Miracles’, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society  17 
(1916 –17), 77 –94; repr. in Tweyma n (1995), vol. v, 444 –55 
 Flew, Antony, ‘Hume’s Check’, Philosophical Quarterly  9 (1959), 1 –18  33  Mackie, J. L., The Miracle of Theism  (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 1982), ch. 1  
Broad is sympathetic but ultimately critical of the strength of Hume’s conclusion, and sees it as inconsistent 
with his inductive scepticism (see §6c for suggested reading on this crucial issue). Flew takes Hume to be less 
ambitious, aiming to provide only a ‘check’ to the ‘impertinent solicitations’ of ‘bigotry and superstit ion’ 
addressed to ‘the wise and learned’ rather than a more general offensive criterion; however he too sees the essay 
as inconsistent with Hume’s account of induction. Mackie is less textually focused, and therefore less faithful to 
the details of Hume’s treatment, but his discussion — which generally supports a Humean point of view — is 
philosophically interesting in its own right (for criticism, see Bruce Langtry, ‘Mackie on Miracles’, 
Australasian Journal of Philosophy  66 (1988), 368 –75). 
Perhaps not su rprisingly, the most substantial contributions are on the theistic side of the debate, with two 
books being particularly noteworthy:  
 Swinburne, Richard, The Concept of Miracle  (London and Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1970)  
Swinburne’s well -known study starts b y analysing how the notions of ‘miracle’ and ‘law of nature’ should be 
understood (criticising Hume for ignoring the relevance of an event’s religious significance), then considers the 
appropriate criteria for weighing of evidence and for preferring a purp osive to a scientific explanation. Overall 
Swinburne finds Hume’s conclusion simplistic, in that it fails to take into account both the full range of possible 
evidence, and also how miracles can fit into a pattern of explanation within a theistic world -view in which 
miracles and other evidence for God’s existence are mutually supporting.  
 Houston, J., Reported Miracles: A Critique of Hume  (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1994)  
Houston’s book is more theologically informed than Swinburne’s, but just a s philosophically sensitive, reaching 
conclusions in a similar spirit but adding more incisive criticism of Hume. It starts with a historical survey of 
views on the miraculous, ranging through Augustine, Aquinas, Locke, Hume, Bradley and Troeltsch, and end s 
with two chapters on the epistemological and theological implications of taking miracles seriously. But the 
heart of the book consists of two chapters on the concept of a miracle (one on theological conceptions, the other 
on Hume’s) followed by three in which ‘Hume’s case’ is assessed. Houston’s primary criticism (ch.  9) 
questions Hume’s assumption ‘that the evidence for the relevant law(s) of nature is, in the overall dialectical 
context, undeniably relevant to an assessment of the probability (or improb ability) that a reported putative 
miracle actually took place’ (p.  133). This threatens to undercut Hume’s entire argument in Part  i of his essay, 
the point being that if the theist himself takes the reported event to be a violation  of what, in other insta nces, has 
been a universal law, then the evidence for that law garnered from those other instances is exactly in accord 
with what the theist claims — Hume is apparently simply begging the question against the possibility of a 
miracle by presuming that the general rule must extend to the event in question. Houston follows up with a 
secondary objection (ch.  10), against Hume’s aprioristic assumption that a report of an improbable event must 
itself inherit that improbability. For it would be perfectly possible  that mankind in general — like the proverbial 
Edinburgh solicitor to whom Houston alludes — should be more  reliable when reporting unusual events than 
when reporting relatively everyday happenings. Of course Hume, in Part  ii of his essay, argues strongly that the 
facts of human nature are otherwise, but the point remains that on Hume’s own principles such facts can be 
known only a posteriori. For his argument is founded on an inductive conception of testimony, according to 
which its reliability can be know n only through experience; hence experience alone can tell us under what 
circumstances different types of testimony are more, or less, reliable.4 
                                                      
4 Houston’s book has yet to receive  a substantial answer, and he efficiently dismisses the various Humean responses that he himself 
considers. Hence it may be helpful to suggest some other possible lines of reply. One response to his primary criticism may b e implicit  34 Hume’s inductive conception of testimony is itself attacked by Coady in an article and in a recent book:  
 Coad y, C. A. J., ‘Testimony and Observation’, American Philosophical Quarterly  10 (1973), 149 –55 
 Coady, C. A. J., Testimony  (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 1992), especially ch. 4 and ch. 10  
The tenth chapter of Coady’s book deals with the topic of ‘as tonishing reports’, describing some of the 
complexities of assessing such evidence and concluding that no simple rule of assessment, such as Hume’s, is 
likely to be universally applicable. But he addresses more basic concerns in his fourth chapter (as in h is article), 
attacking Hume’s ‘reductive approach’ whereby testimony is viewed as simply a species of inductive evidence, 
which therefore needs to be grounded on an observed correlation between reports and facts if it is to provide an 
adequate basis for be lief. He argues for the incoherence of this view (which, for example, seems to imply the 
possibility of testimony’s existing in a community but yet having no connection with reality), and concludes 
that testimonial evidence must instead be seen as a fundam ental category of evidence that is not reducible to 
other kinds. Hume is defended against this attack in:  
 Traiger, Saul, ‘Humean Testimony’, Pacific Philosophical Quarterly  74 (1993), 135 –49 
where Traiger argues that the traditional attribution to Hume of  an epistemically individualist and purely 
inductivist conception of testimony is incorrect.  
Yet another book -length attack on Hume, which has appeared very recently, has the merit of giving 
detailed attention not only to Hume’s own argument, but to four ‘ reconstructions’ of it by Mackie, Mill, Flew, 
and Sobel:  
 Johnson, David, Hume, Holism, and Miracles  (Ithaca and London: Cornell University Press, 1999), 
especially 5 –33 
Johnson provides forceful criticisms of many distinctive points — made by Mill and Fle w in particular — that 
are somewhat distant from Hume’s own words and so tend not to be addressed by other authors. However his 
principal criticism of all five versions of Hume’s argument is that they ultimately beg the question against the 
miraculous, eit her by defining miracles out of existence (e.g. as exceptions to an exceptionless law of nature), or 
by taking for granted without argument that the inductive balance of evidence against any miracle cannot be 
outweighed by testimony on the other side. John son maintains that the inductive evidence can be so 
outweighed, even in principle by the testimony of a single witness, and he supports this claim with illustrations 
involving selection of marbles from an urn (pp.  25, 56) and reports of unusual weather (p.  31). These 
illustrations indeed appear initially very convincing, but it is a shame that Johnson does not consider some 
possible objections, for which we must turn to another strand of recent debate.  
                                                                                                                                                                                     
in Hume’s comment that ‘it is impossible for us to know the attributes or actions of such a Being [i.e.  God], otherwise than from the 
experience which we have of his productions, in the usual course of nature. This still reduces us to past observation, and ob liges us to 
compare the instances of the violation of truth in the testimony of men, with those of the violation of the laws of nature by miracle s, in 
order to judge which of them is most likely and probable.’ (E129). Thus the postulation of divine intentions that go beyond w hat is 
manifest in common experience will be gratuitous (a message spelt out explicitly in Enquiry  XI), undermining any attempts to use the 
theistic hypothesis to go further than the conclusions of ordinary induction from experienced regularities. Developm ent of this debate is 
likely to move beyond the single issue of miracles to the general explanatory value of a theistic world -view (including the Problem of 
Evil), somewhat confirming the moral drawn by both Swinburne and Houston. Houston’s secondary objec tion is less fundamental, for 
although his logical point is well made, from a Humean point of view it remains plausible that inductive evidence for the rel iability of 
any testimony can never exceed the evidence for a law of nature.   35 As Owen makes clear in Chapter  12, illustrations in a s imilar spirit to those used by Johnson — often 
involving lotteries, urns and other probabilistically calculable scenarios — date right back to Hume’s 
contemporary Richard Price. But after many years of relative neglect they have recently inspired great int erest 
in the formal analysis of Hume’s argument, largely with the aim of clarifying their true force against it. The 
standard lottery example involves a report (e.g. from a newspaper which is normally 99% reliable in such 
matters) that the winning ticket i n a lottery of, say, 10,000 tickets was ticket number 297 (or whatever). In this 
situation, it seems that Hume’s argument would advise us to reject the report, on the grounds that it is more 
probable that the report should be false (probability  1%) than th at ticket 297 should really have won the lottery 
(probability 0.01%). But intuitively this seems quite wrong — if the newpaper is 99% reliable in such matters, 
then surely we should have 99% confidence that the winning ticket was indeed 297. As Hambourger shows, 
such points can also be made in respect of many other types of report, even something as mundane as 
someone’s reporting their own name:  
 Hambourger, Robert, ‘Belief in Miracles and Hume’s Essay’, Noûs  14 (1980), 587 –604 
Owen hints (in his footnote  12) that this problem for Hume is solvable by taking into account that in such a 
lottery, an incorrect report of the winning number can be wrong in 9,999 different ways (hence if some ticket 
other than 297 actually won but the newspaper reported it wrongly,  the chance that it would report the particular 
number 297 is only 1 in 9,999). However a formal treatment of this solution requires a Bayesian analysis more 
complex than Owen’s simplified version — two such treatments (the first involving non -standard inf initesimals 
and the second more straightforward) are presented by:  
 Sobel, Jordan Howard, ‘On the Evidence of Testimony for Miracles: A Bayesian Interpretation of David 
Hume’s Analysis’, Philosophical Quarterly  37 (1987), 166 –86 
 Dawid, Philip and Gillies,  Donald, ‘A Bayesian Analysis of Hume’s Argument concerning Miracles’, 
Philosophical Quarterly  39 (1989), 57 –65 
However Olin points out that matters are not quite this straightforward, because an exactly parallel move is 
possible with respect to miracle re ports on the basis that if the reported event did not happen, then it would be 
extremely unlikely that this particular thing would be reported:  
 Olin, D., ‘Hume, Miracles, and Prior Probabilities’, in Tweyman (1995), vol. v, 416 –26 
Nevertheless there remai ns, as Hambourger stresses, an evident disanalogy between the case of the lottery and 
the miracle — in the lottery the particular  event reported may be initially improbable, but the type of event 
reported is not. Schlesinger provides a formal analysis whic h is able to take this into account, by explicitly 
giving a low value to the probability that any kind  of miracle has occurred in a specific situation:  
 Schlesinger, George N., ‘Miracles and Probabilities’, Noûs  21 (1987), 219 –32; repr. in Owen (2000),  
265–78 
Schlesinger goes on to argue that miracle reports can nevertheless raise the probability of God’s existence 
(though highly paradoxically, he suggests that on the assumption that God exists, such reports need not raise the 
probability of the miracle its elf!).  
The continuing debate over lottery and related examples is not of merely technical interest, for it has 
brought into the open many issues of more general relevance. Olin, for example, lays the blame for Hume’s 
problems on his failure to distinguish statistical from epistemic probability, and on his key presumption that 
evidence is additive. Hambourger too sees Hume’s treatment of evidence as simplistic, in particular his 
supposition that the likelihood of the reported event can be factored out separa tely from the credibility of the 
report (a point which also seems to lie behind some criticisms that Johnson makes in his book, for example in  36 chapter  7). If indeed the two cannot be separated, then the only coherent way of interpreting Hume’s rule for the  
assessment of miracle reports may be to reduce it to a triviality, though arguably this need not be objectionable 
(for a sketch of this issue, and some implications for attempts to formalise Hume’s position, see Peter Millican, 
‘“Hume’s Theorem” concernin g Miracles’, Philosophical Quarterly  43 (1993), 489 –95). 
9(b)  Hume on the Design Argument  
In terms of their direct impact on the secondary literature, Sections X and XI of the Enquiry  could hardly be 
further apart. With Section  X the problem is one of sel ection from a vast range of critiques and replies; with 
Section  XI the problem is to find even a handful of contributions that directly address the specific issues that 
Hume raises there. A notable exception is the relevant chapter of Flew’s classic book:  
 Flew, Antony, Hume’s Philosophy of Belief  (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1961), ch. 9  
Flew generally supports Hume’s contention that it is illegitimate to infer qualities in the cosmic Designer 
beyond those that are manifested in the experienced cosmos,  and he also agrees with Hume’s closing hint that 
the supposed Deity’s uniqueness is a decisive obstacle to viewing theism as a hypothesis open to confirmation 
from the empirical evidence. Both principles are challenged forcefully by Swinburne, who argues that they are 
contrary to standard criteria of scientific inference:  
 Swinburne, R. G., ‘The Argument from Design’, Philosophy  43 (1968), 199 –212; repr. in Tweyman 
(1995), vol. v, 197 –209 (see especially Swinburne’s itemised points 1 to 3)  
These general is sues are explored by Gaskin in Chapter  13 of this volume, and a detailed reply to Swinburne 
has recently appeared in a new journal published by the Council for Secular Humanism, which is named after 
Philo, Hume’s sceptical spokesman in the Dialogues : 
 Beau doin, John, ‘On Some Criticisms of Hume’s Principle of Proportioning Cause to Effect’, Philo  2 
(1999), 26 –40; also available from the website www.etext.leeds.ac.uk/hume/  
 We must now turn to the Dialogues  themselves, which have attracted the vast majority of scholarly interest 
regarding Hume’s criticisms of the Design Argument. What follows is only a very brief review of a massive 
debate, for the puzzle of how far the Dialogues  reveal Hume’s own views on religion has for many years been 
one of the most disc ussed issues of Hume interpretation. There are several detailed commentaries on the 
Dialogues available, of which Kemp Smith’s (referred to in §9 above) is certainly the most influential. Two 
others of particular interest are:  
 Pike, Nelson, ‘Hume on the A rgument from Design’, in Pike (ed.), David Hume: Dialogues concerning 
Natural Religion  (Indianapolis: Bobbs -Merrill, 1970), 125 –238 
 Tweyman, Stanley, introduction to Tweyman (ed.), David Hume: Dialogues concerning Natural Religion 
in Focus  (London and New  York: Routledge, 1991), 1 –94 
Kemp Smith’s uncompromising interpretation provides the background to the subsequent debate: ‘I shall 
contend that Philo [the sceptic], from start to finish, represents Hume; and that Cleanthes [the advocate of the 
Design Argu ment] can be regarded as Hume’s mouthpiece only in those passages in which he is explicitly 
agreeing with Philo, or in those other passages in which, while refuting Demea [the mystically inclined a  priori 
theist], he is also being used to prepare the way f or one or other of Philo’s independent conclusions.’ ( D 59). 
Pike (pp.  224–34) disputes this sceptical reading, highlighting Cleanthes’ rejoinder in Dialogue  III where he 
says to Philo that if he contemplates the structure of an eye, the idea of a designer  will ‘immediately flow in 
upon you with a force like that of sensation’ ( D 154). Philo makes no reply at this point, but Pike suggests that 
it is his acceptance of this ‘irregular’ but ‘irresistible’ argument that forms the basis for his famously puzzling   37 ‘confession’ at the beginning of Dialogue  XII (D 214–7). Tweyman develops this idea further, relating it to 
Hume’s discussion of scepticism in the Enquiry . He suggests that Philo’s argumentation itself exemplifies the 
Humean transition, discussed by Norto n in Chapter  14 of this volume, from Pyrrhonian scepticism (which 
though unsustainable performs the useful service of undermining our initial dogmatic confidence) to mitigated 
scepticism (which corrects the Pyrrhonian doubts with ‘common sense and reflecti on’ — E 161). According to 
Tweyman, in Dialogues I to VIII Philo argues as a Pyrrhonian, aiming for suspense of judgement, but thereafter 
he mitigates his scepticism and by Dialogue XII is prepared to acknowledge the natural force of Cleanthes’ 
‘irregular’  argument.  
Since Hume is famous for affirming the power of nature to compel belief beyond the reach of reason, it is 
not surprising that many commentators have seen a similar pattern in the Dialogues , with Cleanthes’ irresistible 
inference of Dialogue  III and Philo’s confession of Dialogue XII indicating that theism may be a Humean 
‘natural belief’ (the term is Kemp Smith’s) alongside those in inductive uniformity, the reliability of our senses, 
and the independent continuity of the external world. Butler a nd Penelhum have been perhaps the strongest 
advocates of this idea, and Gaskin its most resolute opponent, with the following works (in order) giving the 
essence of their debate:  
 Butler, R. J., ‘Natural Belief and the Enigma of Hume’, Archiv für Geschicht e der Philosophie  42 (1960), 
73–100 
 Gaskin, J. C. A., ‘God, Hume and Natural Belief’, Philosophy  49 (1974), 281 –94; repr. in Tweyman 
(1995), vol. v, 150 –63 (this article is reproduced, largely verbatim, on pages 129 –39 of the first edition of 
his book Hum e’s Philosophy of Religion , London and Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1978)  
 Penelhum, Terence, ‘Natural Belief and Religious Belief in Hume’s Philosophy’, Philosophical Quarterly  
33 (1983), 266 –82; repr. in Tweyman (1995), vol. v, 164 –80 
 Gaskin, J. C. A., Hume’ s Philosophy of Religion , 2nd edn. (Basingstoke and London: Macmillan, 1988), 
116–31 
Gaskin objects to the classification of theism as a ‘natural belief’ on the grounds that it does not seem to be a 
belief of common life, is not irresistible and independen t of reasoning, is not necessary for action in the world, 
and is not universal. In response to these criticisms, Penelhum suggests a modified position according to which 
the belief in God, though potentially requiring reasoning to bring it about (and hence  not ‘natural’ in the strict 
sense) nevertheless is like the natural beliefs in being, once acquired , beyond the power of reason to dislodge. 
But given the very minimal theism which Penelhum ascribes to Hume, his difference from Gaskin reduces to 
the quest ion of whether, in Hume’s view, such ‘attenuated deism’ may be, after all, a reasonable conclusion to 
draw from the Design Argument. Gaskin maintains that it is, though since this reasonable belief is easily 
conflated with a natural and non -rational feelin g for design , the psychological upshot of Penelhum’s and 
Gaskin’s positions may ultimately be hard to distinguish. Another subtle variation on the same general theme is 
provided by:  
 Yandell, K. E., ‘Hume on Religious Belief’, in Donald W. Livingston and J ames T. King (eds.), Hume: a 
Re-evaluation  (New York: Fordham University Press, 1976), 109 –25; repr. in Tweyman (1995), vol.  v, 
36–55 
who seeks illumination by starting from the Natural History of Religion  instead of the highly ambiguous 
Dialogues . Yandell ’s Hume accepts that some minimal religious principle is part of human nature, though it is 
not irresistible and is often intermixed with more primitive religious feelings arising from ignorant hopes and 
fears. Although the Design Argument is unsound, cont emplation of the order of the world can trigger our innate 
propensity to believe in a Designer, and Yandell maintains that this propensity — despite its instinctive nature  38 — is appropriately judged to be part of our rational  capacity. Why such an instinct should be appropriately 
called ‘rational’ is, however, unclear, and one might suspect that Yandell has here gone too far in attempting to 
find a genuine reconciliation between Hume’s refutation of the Design Argument and his endorsements of the 
design hypo thesis in the Natural History  and elsewhere. For a more straightforward explanation of Hume’s 
position suggests itself — that his declarations of belief are simply instances of the ‘theological lying’ discussed 
by Berman and Fieser in their essays mentione d in §9 above. Faced with this possibility, the only way of 
revealing Hume’s true opinions seems to be to follow where his most forceful arguments lead, and to try to 
identify the targets at which they are aimed.  
With this in mind, many authors have attemp ted to identify the real archetypes behind the characters of the 
Dialogues . Pakaluk takes all three to be representive of abstract philosophical ‘types’, with Philo being a 
mitigated sceptic or ‘true philosopher’, Cleanthes a ‘false philosopher’, and Demea  a ‘vulgar reasoner’. Like 
Tweyman, Pakaluk sees Philo’s eventual acceptance of the design hypothesis as exemplifying a Humean 
transition of thought, though not a change of theory so much as a change of temper, when the natural sentiments 
of the mind that have hitherto been suppressed return after the sceptical duelling ceases. In developing this 
account, he also draws various interesting parallels between the Dialogues  and Enquiry  XII (especially Hume’s 
discussion of the external world in Enquiry  XII Part i): 
 Pakaluk, Michael, ‘Philosophical “Types” in Hume’s Dialogues ’, in V. Hope (ed.), Philosophers of the 
Scottish Enlightenment  (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1984), 116 –32; repr. in Tweyman (1995), 
vol. v, 323 –38 
A more concrete identification o f Hume’s characters was influentially made by Mossner very soon after the first 
appearance of Kemp Smith’s edition. Accepting Kemp Smith’s identification of Philo with Hume, Mossner 
argues that Cleanthes and Demea represent respectively Joseph Butler and S amuel Clarke:  
 Mossner, Ernest C., ‘The Enigma of Hume’, Mind  45 (1936), 334 –349 
All three of Mossner’s identifications are challenged, however, by a comprehensive comparative study of Hume 
and Butler:  
 Jeffner, Anders, Butler and Hume on Religion  (Stockho lm: Diakonistyrelsens Bokförlag, 1966), especially 
131–43, 169 –71, 180 –209 
According to Jeffner, although Butler is indeed a primary target of the Dialogues , he is not represented directly 
by any of the characters. Instead, Cleanthes is modelled on a type of scientific theologian associated with the 
Royal Society (most famously Boyle and Newton, but also John Wilkins, John Ray, William Derham, George 
Cheyne, and Colin Maclaurin), who were enthusiastic advocates of the analogical Design Argument. Here 
Jeffne r draws on:  
 Hurlbutt III, R. H., ‘David Hume and Scientific Theism’, Journal of the History of Ideas  17 (1956),  
486–97 
who quotes passages from Cheyne and Maclaurin strikingly similar to Cleanthes’ words (including his famous 
appeal to the ‘force like tha t of sensation’ in Dialogue  III which has inspired so much interest in the natural 
belief interpretation). Jeffner goes on to suggest that Demea is modelled on the theological school of Peter 
Browne, William King, and William Law, who denied that we have u nderstanding of the supposed analogical 
similarity between God’s and man’s attributes and who were accordingly inclined to prefer the aprioristic 
reasoning of Samuel Clarke. Finally, Jeffner identifies Philo not with Hume himself but with Bayle, combining 
scepticism and mysticism with apparently devout fideism. On this reading, it is the combinations of the 
characters rather than their individual positions that display Hume’s true views and spell defeat for Butler’s  39 theism. Philo and Demea combine to portra y the evil of the world and the impossibility of an analogical 
argument for a good God; Cleanthes and Philo combine to reject a priori natural theology; while Cleanthes and 
Demea combine to insist that faith, if it is to be intellectually respectable, shou ld be founded on reason. Taken 
together, these results imply the impossibility of any defensible theism.  
9(c)  The Contemporary Design Argument  
Although for many years the Design Argument lay under the cloud of Hume’s critique, and perhaps even more 
influe ntially the undermining of its biological aspect through the theory of evolution, it has recently enjoyed 
something of a renaissance. The first wave of this rebirth came from philosophers who advocated treating the 
argument not as decisive in itself, but a s part of a cumulative case  in which a wide range of considerations are 
adduced to show the overall plausibility of a theistic world view. The roots of this approach go back to Hume’s 
contemporary Joseph Butler, but its modern pioneer was Mitchell, soon to  be followed by Swinburne:  
 Mitchell, Basil, The Justification of Religious Belief  (London and Basingstoke: Macmillan, 1973), 
especially chapters 2 and 3  
 Swinburne, Richard, The Existence of God , (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 1979), especially 
ch. 8 (chapters 10 and 11 consider the Problem of Evil)  
The best -known critique of Swinburne is by Mackie, who starts by explicitly following Hume’s objections to 
the logic of the Design Argument. He then — like Philo in Dialogues X and XI — presses home his  attack by 
emphasising the Problem of Evil, which aims to turn the tables by confronting the theist with empirical 
evidence that is far less favourable to his optimistic conclusions:  
 Mackie, J. L., The Miracle of Theism  (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Pre ss, 1982), chapters 8 and 9  
The revised edition of Swinburne’s book adds a direct reply to Mackie in a new appendix:  
 Swinburne, Richard, The Existence of God , revised edition (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 
1991), appendix A  
 The second wave of the  Design Argument’s renaissance has come, perhaps surprisingly, from the same 
arena that inspired the Enlightenment vision of a divine clockmaker, namely the heavens. Modern discoveries in 
physics and cosmology suggest that the Universe began with a ‘Big Ba ng’, and that the initial conditions of this 
Big Bang, and the laws of nature that have governed the Universe since, must have been impressively ‘finely 
tuned’ to permit the evolution of stars, planets, and hence — ultimately — life. For a fairly detailed (and 
moderately technical) outline of this apparent ‘fine tuning’, see:  
 Davies, P.  C. W., The Accidental Universe  (Cambridge, New York and Melbourne: Cambridge University 
Press, 1982), especially chapters 3 and 4  
Less detailed overviews are provided by tw o philosophical discussions from strong advocates of the Fine 
Tuning Argument, who draw the inference that unless the Universe were designed with life in mind, the 
existence of this favourable fine tuning would be vanishingly improbable:  
 Swinburne, Richar d, The Existence of God , revised edition (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 
1991), appendix B  
 Craig, William Lane, ‘The Teleological Argument and the Anthropic Principle’, in W. L. Craig and M. 
McLeod (eds.), The Logic of Rational Theism: Exploratory Essays  (Lewiston, New York: Edwin Mellen, 
1990), 127 –53  40 All three of these writers make reference to the (rather unfortunately named, and variously interpreted) 
‘Anthropic Principle’, which has been used to explain away the apparent fine tuning — or ‘anthr opic 
coincidences’ — as a selection effect. This idea can be summed up as a retort to the theist: ‘You shouldn’t find 
it surprising to observe that the Universe is “fine tuned” for life, because if it weren’t, you wouldn’t be here to 
observe anything’. As the discussions above make clear, however, this retort seems dubious unless there is a 
‘population’ of universes for the selection effect to work on, for if there is only one universe, then it does indeed 
appear surprising (and hence crying out for explana tion) that this sole universe should happen to be ‘finely 
tuned’ in a way that makes possible the existence of observers. (The atheist’s retort conflates the unsurprising 
fact that we fail to observe a universe unsuitable for life, with the surprising fact  that we observe a universe 
suitable for life — indeed that we are here to observe anything at all.) This constitutes a serious problem for the 
atheist, for it seems to put the boot of metaphysical extravagance — traditionally one of the very strongest 
objections to theism — on the other foot. For if the only reasonable alternative to the hypothesis of a divine 
Fine Tuner is a massive ensemble of universes, with life emerging only in the minute proportion that happen to 
be ‘finely tuned’, then arguably thei sm has now become the more modest and metaphysically economical of the 
available hypotheses. All of these themes are engagingly developed at length in the most extensive 
philosophical treatment of the issue so far published:  
 Leslie, John, Universes  (Londo n and New York: Routledge, 1989)  
Leslie is not, however, a conventional theist, for the ‘God’ to whose action he attributes the creation of the 
Universe is a Neoplatonic ‘ethical requiredness’ rather than a divine person.  
The recent discovery of the Fine T uning Argument is perhaps the most significant development in natural 
theology since Hume’s Dialogues , and it is too early yet to attempt any general assessment of its merits (not 
least because the physical theory on which it is based is very far from bein g solidly established). One notable 
advantage that it has over traditional versions of the Design Argument is to point unambiguously to advance 
planning  as the ultimate source of order in the Universe, thus bypassing Hume’s objection ( D 147–8, 170 –85) 
that it is mere bias to prefer intelligence over the other potential sources of order that we experience, such as 
vegetation, generation, and the emergence of patterns from chaos. The cosmological scale of the argument also 
seems to lend support to the theist’ s desired conclusions about the Designer’s unity and supremacy (cf.  D 166–
8). But other Humean objections remain strong, particularly his insistence ( E 143–8, D 149–50) that, without 
experience of the origin of worlds, we are unable to make any proper asse ssment of the probability that a 
life-favouring universe (whether like ours or profoundly different) might exist without being expressly 
designed. Indeed this point gains even more force in the light of modern physics, which has repeatedly 
demonstrated the  unreliability of our intuitive judgements when applied beyond the human scale of things, to 
atoms and the cosmos. Another Humean objection ( D 191) highlights our ignorance of the underlying structure 
of the world, suggesting that for all we know there may  be some deep reason why it has to be  structured as it is. 
Applied to the Fine Tuning Argument, this draws attention to the possibility of a future theory that will provide 
a clear explanation for what at present seem surprising coincidences. Such objectio ns, like those made by Philo 
to the traditional Design Argument a century before the theory of evolution, may appear ‘mere cavils and 
sophisms’ ( D 202), being based on promissory notes and appeals to ignorance rather than offering any explicit 
alternative theory. But just like Philo, the atheist can effectively force his adversary onto the defensive by 
turning instead to the ancient Problem of Evil, where the anthropic coincidences are of no help to the theist. A 
malevolent spirit, just as much as a benevol ent one, can be expected to favour a Universe conducive to life, 
because as Smith points out, life is a prerequisite of moral evil as well as of moral good:  
 Smith, Quentin, ‘The Anthropic Coincidences, Evil and the Disconfirmation of Theism’, Religious St udies  
28 (1992), 347 –50  41 For an extended development of this ‘antitheistic’ strategy, which applies it to a wide range of traditional 
theistic arguments and to Swinburne’s Design Argument in particular detail, see:  
 Millican, P.  J. R., ‘The Devil’s Advocate ’, Cogito  3 (1989), 193 –207; also available from the website 
www.etext.leeds.ac.uk/hume/  
Presumably Hume himself — like Philo — viewed the Problem of Evil as the theist’s most formidable obstacle, 
obliging him ‘to tug the labouring oar, and to support [his ] philosophical subtilties against the dictates of plain 
reason and experience’ ( D 202). To explore the prospects for a successful theistic defence, see (in addition to 
the books by Mitchell and Swinburne mentioned above):  
 Taliaferro, Charles, Contemporar y Philosophy of Religion  (Oxford and Malden, Massachusetts: Blackwell, 
1998), ch. 9  
 Adams, Marilyn McCord and Adams, Robert Merrihew (eds.), The Problem of Evil  (Oxford and New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1990)  
Taliaferro gives a wide -ranging overview of contemporary approaches, while the Adams’ collection contains 
many of the most important pieces, including a number discussed by Taliaferro.  
10.  Scepticism  
Section  XII of the Enquiry  is particularly complex, since as Norton makes clear in Chapter  14 it not only 
discusses a wide range of sceptical positions and arguments, but also makes reference (either implicitly or 
explicitly) to many other aspects of Hume’s philosophy. Any proper understanding of Hume’s scepticism must 
therefore take account of a num ber of important issues discussed earlier, most notably the relationship between 
the Enquiry  and the Treatise  (§3c), Hume’s argument concerning induction (§5b and §5c), and his discussions 
of philosophical and unphilosophical probability (§6c), but also hi s alleged causal realism (§7c) and his 
religious scepticism (§9).  
Though seriously dated in some matters of interpretation, each of the following provides a stimulating 
discussion of the wide range of issues that arise in this complex section:  
 Flew, Anton y, Hume’s Philosophy of Belief  (London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1961), ch. 10  
 Passmore, John, Hume’s Intentions , 3rd edn. (London: Duckworth, 1980), ch. 7  
The most prominent of the topics raised for the first time in Enquiry  XII are scepticism with regard  to the 
external world and with regard to infinite divisibility. The literature on each of these is sufficiently rich to merit 
separate consideration before we turn to discuss more general perspectives on Hume’s scepticism.  
10(a)  Scepticism Regarding the External World  
The first major sceptical topic in Section  XII is the external world — which also incorporates the primary –
secondary quality distinction — though this Enquiry  discussion ( E 151–5) is drastically scaled down from that 
in the Treatise  (T 187–231). No doubt for this reason, most commentators have focused almost exclusively on 
the far more sophisticated Treatise  account, the interpretation of which poses severe problems not only because 
of its complexity but also because Hume’s ultimate view has proved so elusive. Good presentations of this 
Treatise  account have appeared in a number of general books on Hume:  
 Stroud, Barry, Hume  (London and Boston: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1977), ch. 5  
 Noonan, Harold W., Hume on Knowledge  (London and New York: Rou tledge, 1999), ch. 4   42  Pears, David, Hume’s System  (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1990), ch. 10 and 11  
 Fogelin, Robert, Hume’s Skepticism in the Treatise of Human Nature  (London, Boston and Melbourne: 
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1985), chapters  6 and 7  
Stroud, whose entire book follows Kemp Smith in stressing Hume’s naturalism in opposition to his scepticism, 
interprets the discussion of Treatise  I. iv. 2 as an attempt to explain the origin of our idea of continued and 
distinct existence, with t he aim of showing that this idea is not innate. The apparently sceptical outcome of the 
discussion may be unsettling, but again its point is naturalistic, ‘to show that reason, as traditionally understood, 
is not the dominant force in human life’ (pp.  116–7). Noonan starts his chapter in a similar spirit, by 
emphasising the naturalistic purposes of Hume’s sceptical arguments, but unlike Stroud he goes on to consider 
the deeper sceptical problems raised by Treatise  I. iv. 4 (concerning the primary –secondary quality distinction; 
cf. E 154–5), and ends with the comment that Hume’s sceptical conclusions here undermine his earlier attempt 
to give a consistent account of the distinction between the principles of the understanding and those of the 
narrow imaginatio n: ‘Thus our common belief in an external world is indubitable, but in no way justified and, 
being false, incapable of any justification’ (p.  186). Pears restricts his attention to Treatise  I. iv. 2, dissecting 
Hume’s arguments in detail and blaming his co nclusion ‘that our belief in body is intellectually indefensible’ 
(p. 196) on an inadequate recognition of the distinction between impressions and physical objects, both in 
Hume’s own view and in that which he attributes to the vulgar. Pears thus interpret s Hume as seriously 
sceptical about (both the tenability and content of) our belief in body even before the primary –secondary quality 
objection of Treatise  I. iv. 4 which according to the Enquiry  ‘goes farther’ ( E 155). Fogelin sees all this 
scepticism as fundamental to Hume’s intentions, taking him to be a committed Pyrrhonian who deliberately 
aims to highlight irreconcilable differences between the various points of view described in his ‘natural history’ 
of philosophy, with none of these providing a stab le outcome. (Fogelin very clearly spells out this position — 
which he calls ‘radical perspectivism’ — in a later critique of Garrett: ‘Garrett on the Consistency of Hume’s 
Philosophy’, Hume Studies  24 (1998), 161 –9.) 
Probably the two best -known discussions  of these sections of the Treatise  are: 
 Price, H. H., Hume’s Theory of the External World  (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1940)  
 Bennett, Jonathan, Locke, Berkeley, Hume: Central Themes  (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971), ch.  13 and 
pp. 91–4 
Neither of these is pa rticularly scholarly by modern standards, but both are serious and illuminating attempts to 
address the philosophical issues. Price’s book is very dated, relating Hume’s views to positions that were 
influential at the time such as those of Kant, Russell an d the logical positivists. However this in itself gives the 
book a distinctive value, because Price’s elegant writing makes its age no obstacle to comprehension, while 
some parts of Hume’s theory (e.g. his claim that perceptions can exist independently) ca n be usefully 
illuminated by being put alongside their early twentieth century descendants (e.g. Russell’s notion of 
sensibilia). Bennett’s discussion is far shorter, and probably for that reason more intense as he grapples 
philosophically with Hume’s prob lems in an effort to avoid his apparently despairing conclusion. Though 
rewarding this makes for difficult reading, but Bennett’s views are given a relatively simple critical discussion 
in an introductory book which also provides its own analysis of Hume’s  argument:  
 Dicker, Georges, Hume’s Epistemology & Metaphysics  (London and New York: Routledge, 1998), ch.  6 
Dicker’s chapter ends with a sketch of the Kantian response to this form of scepticism, which again will prove 
useful for students needing a straig htforward introduction to a very complex issue.   43 From the point of view of a student of the Enquiry , perhaps the three most thought -provoking recent 
discussions of Hume’s scepticism about the external world are:  
 Bricke, John, Hume’s Philosophy of Mind  (Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1980), ch. 1  
 Garrett, Don, Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy  (Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1997), ch. 10 especially 209 –220 
 Wright, John P., The Sceptical Realism of David Hume  (Manchester:  Manchester University Press, 1983), 
ch. 2 and §11  
Bricke is unusual in giving serious attention to the Enquiry  as well as to the Treatise , and he provides a careful 
and philosophically sensitive discussion of both. However he concurs with other commentato rs in finding 
Hume’s position ultimately unstable, showing sympathy with the perspectival view championed by Fogelin 
before finally concluding that Hume is himself probably a representative realist, whose sceptical attack on such 
realism is intended not to  refute it outright but only to undermine our confidence in building theories that stray 
too far from the vulgar perspective. Garrett goes further in attempting to develop a consistent Humean position, 
based on his view of Hume as primarily a cognitive sci entist rather than a sceptical philosopher. He does this by 
thoroughly downplaying the apparent extreme scepticism which has proved so puzzling for Stroud and other 
previous commentators in the ‘naturalist’ tradition: ‘Nowhere does Hume claim that most of our beliefs in the 
existence of continued and distinct existences are unworthy of assent, nor that such beliefs should be rejected or 
suspended.’ (p.  220). This claim involves some delicate interpretation of Hume’s statements, some of which 
superficially a ppear to tell strongly in the opposite direction. But at least some of this appearance can be 
explained away, as Wright also does in an account which considers the background to Hume’s views in 
physiological theories of perception deriving in large part fr om Malebranche. According to Wright, most of 
Hume’s Treatise  discussion is devoted to explaining — in terms that are at least implicitly physiological — the 
‘vulgar’ belief in external objects that are supposedly identical to our perceptions. This belief H ume takes to be 
clearly false, though it importantly paves the way psychologically  for representative realism by setting the scene 
for the ‘obvious’ argument from sensory variation that is presented most clearly at E 152 (cf. T 193). 
Representative realism  is thus an example of those ‘reflections of common life, methodized and corrected’ 
(E 162) which Hume commends, and he can consistently endorse it because its dependence on the false vulgar 
view is psychological rather than logical. Such realism might see m to be contradicted (as Fogelin and Noonan 
suppose) by Hume’s scepticism concerning the primary –secondary quality distinction. But although this indeed 
implies that we are unable to conceive distinctly of objects ‘specifically different from our perceptio ns’, it does 
not prevent our forming a bare ‘relative idea’ of them ( T 68) and thus maintaining a form of realism even 
though we lack any distinct conception of the objects concerned. As we have seen in §7c above, this notion of 
relative ideas also plays a  major role in Wright’s account of Hume’s ‘sceptical realism’ with regard to 
causation; indeed it is the similarity between the two cases which provides much of the attraction for his 
interpretation.  
Unfortunately neither Garrett nor Wright says much about  Hume’s discussion in the Enquiry , but both 
suggest the possibility of a non -sceptical reading. And if, like Garrett, we are prepared to entertain the 
possibility that some of Hume’s statements have an import rather different from their superficial impress ion, 
then this may cast new light on, for example, the crucial final paragraph of Enquiry  XII Part i. This contains 
both the conditional clause: ‘at least, if it be a principle of reason, that all sensible qualities are in the mind, not 
in the object’; and  also a concluding comment that the notion of ‘a certain unknown, inexplicable something ’ is 
‘so imperfect, that no sceptic will think it worth while to contend against it’. These have generally been read in 
what is probably the most natural way, as respec tively endorsing  the ‘principle of reason’ and rejecting  the 
imperfect notion, but they can be read in a very different way, as raising a genuine question  about the alleged  44 principle (which fits well with the agnosticism about objects’ natures implied by b oth Garrett and Wright) and 
as accepting  the admittedly imperfect notion of an ‘unknown, inexplicable something ’. There is no doubt that 
Hume was capable of artful composition (as witnessed supremely by his Dialogues ), but why should he wish to 
present his  views in such an obscure and misleading manner? Perhaps this too can be explained given the 
context in which he wrote and his purposes in the Enquiry . For a prominent theme in British philosophy at the 
time was the pursuit of metaphysics based on supposed  insight into the nature of matter. An accessible 
discussion of this tradition is in a book by Yolton:  
 Yolton, John W., Thinking Matter  (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1983), ch. 5  
which particularly singles out Andrew Baxter as an influentia l exponent of this style of metaphysics, who like 
others in the tradition maintained the intrinsic inertness of matter as a means of drawing religious conclusions. 
Hume knew Baxter’s work, and it has even recently been argued that Baxter may lie behind the  vitriolic attack 
which, as Stewart explains in Chapter  2, ruined Hume’s attempt to gain appointment to an Edinburgh chair at 
just the time when he was writing the Enquiry : 
 Russell, Paul, ‘Wishart, Baxter and Hume’s Letter from a Gentleman ’, Hume Studies  23 (1997), 245 –76 
In this context, Hume may have seen good reason for stressing the sceptical implications of his arguments 
concerning matter, so as to wreck the prospects for any attempt to build a solid metaphysics on insight into its 
nature (which the p rimary –secondary quality distinction was supposed by some to exemplify). As suggested in 
§12 of Chapter  4, a confused and obscure notion of matter would leave empirical induction as the only 
remaining basis for scientific progress, a result which seems to harmonise perfectly with the overall intention 
and design of the Enquiry  as interpreted in Chapter  1 (see especially the end of that chapter).  
Contemporary attacks on scepticism regarding the external world have tended to avoid disputing with 
Hume on his o wn ground, preferring to rely on more fundamental objections to the very coherence of the 
sceptical position. For example both Hookway, and Bell and McGinn (referenced in §10c below) follow 
Wittgenstein’s On Certainty  in seeing the existence of external ob jects as a ‘framework’ judgement 
presupposed by our thinking, rather than as a potentially questionable factual statement in need of evidential 
support. Nevertheless there are exceptions to this general trend, in particular two discussions in a Humean 
spirit, one on each side of the sceptical debate:  
 Mates, Benson, Skeptical Essays  (Chicago and London: Chicago University Press, 1981), ch.  3 
 Aune, Bruce, Knowledge of the External World  (London and New York: Routledge, 1991), especially 
chapters 3, 6 and 7  
Mates engagingly elaborates Humean objections to the external world, concluding that they are ultimately 
unanswerable. Aune sets out to answer them, based on ‘reformed’ empiricist principles that in part claim 
inspiration directly from Hume. At the end of his discussion Aune touches on issues of scientific realism, which 
are central to modern philosophy of science. To explore these issues further, see:  
 Psillos, Stathis, Scientific Realism: How Science Tracks Truth  (London and New York: Routledge, 1999)  
Particularly relevant here are Psillos’ fourth and ninth chapters. The former provides a defence of ‘abduction’ or 
‘inference to the best explanation’ which is strongly reminiscent of the ‘inductive’ justification of induction 
discussed in §5d above. The latt er defends scientific realism against Van Fraassen’s ‘constructive empiricism’ 
largely on grounds that echo the Humean claim that science is ‘nothing but the reflections of common life, 
methodized and corrected’ ( E 162).   45 10(b)  Scepticism Regarding Infinit e Divisibility  
Few would argue that Hume’s work in the philosophy of mathematics is of great lasting significance, for here 
his confident and sometimes almost heroic commitment to empiricism leads him to draw conclusions well 
beyond the bounds of his techn ical expertise. Confirmation of this assessment can be drawn from the minor role 
which Hume is given in a relatively accessible guide to the history and philosophy of the infinite (one which 
ultimately advocates a finitist position, though on Wittgensteini an rather than Humean grounds):  
 Moore, A. W., The Infinite  (London and New York: Routledge, 1990), especially 80 –3, 205  
Perhaps not surprisingly, most authors of books on Hume have ignored the topic, a notable exception being 
Fogelin, who also followed up  his book with an article explaining both the proposed proofs of infinite 
divisibility to which Hume alludes and also his debt to Berkeley’s earlier critique:  
 Fogelin, Robert, Hume’s Skepticism in the Treatise of Human Nature  (London, Boston and Melbourne : 
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1985), ch. 3  
 Fogelin, Robert, ‘Hume and Berkeley on the Proofs of Infinite Divisibility’, Philosophical Review  97 
(1988), 47 –69 
Fogelin’s book concentrates entirely on the Treatise  and his article says little about the Enquiry , whose 
treatment of infinite divisibility is significantly different. Fortunately a recent paper is able to fill the gap:  
 Jacquette, Dale, ‘Infinite Divisibility in Hume’s First Enquiry ’, Hume Studies  20 (1994), 219 –40 
This is one of a number of useful pape rs on the topic to have appeared recently in Hume Studies . Another aims 
to assess the philosophical value of Hume’s contribution:  
 Franklin, James, ‘Achievements and Fallacies in Hume’s Account of Infinite Divisibility’, Hume Studies  
20 (1994), 85 –101 
Thou gh disagreeing with Hume’s would -be refutation of infinite divisibility, Franklin is broadly sympathetic 
even to the extent of maintaining (p.  87) that Hume’s conclusions about the discreteness of space are consistent 
with standard geometry. (For a contrar y view see Mark H. Pressman, ‘Hume on Geometry and Infinite 
Divisibility in the Treatise ’, Hume Studies  23 (1997), 227 –44 especially 239 –41.) However Franklin is 
dismissive of Hume’s attempts to draw conclusions about space from the nature of our ideas, wh ich he sees as 
involving the crude fallacy ‘it is not conceivable by the human mind, therefore it cannot be.’ (p.  93). Hume is 
defended against this charge of crudeness by:  
 Waxman, Wayne, ‘The Psychologistic Foundations of Hume’s Critique of Mathematical Philosophy’, 
Hume Studies  22 (1996), 123 –67 
who finds Hume’s argument to be a consistent following -through of his theories of relations and abstraction 
from Treatise  Book  I Part i and of his Separability Principle. How far all this applies to the Enquiry  is unclear, 
since neither the theory of relations nor the Separability Principle figure explicitly in the later work, while the 
theory of abstraction appears only at E 158‡n., in a role for which it is not used in the Treatise  (as Jacquette 
observes). There  is work to be done on how far the truncated Enquiry  account can make sense without the 
metaphysical commitments of the Treatise  — whether, for example, the argument at E 156‡n. is intended to 
involve a conclusion beyond what Waxman calls the ‘perceptible manifold’, in which case the Separability 
Principle would seem to be required (note that the reference to ‘physical points’ does not decide this issue in the 
way that might be expected, given Hume’s only other uses of the phrase, at T 40 and T 112).   46 10(c)  The Nature of Hume’s Scepticism  
Many discussions of Hume’s scepticism draw comparisons between his views and those of the ancient sceptics, 
either the Pyrrhonists (whose pre -eminent spokesman was Sextus Empiricus) or the Academics (whose 
doctrines became known primarily through the works of Cicero). The views of both of these schools and their 
relationship to Hume are outlined in the final chapter of Norton’s book, which also provides the basis for some 
of his discussion in Chapter  14 of this volume:  
 Norton, David Fate, David Hume: Common -Sense Moralist, Sceptical Metaphysician  (Princeton and 
Guildford: Princeton University Press, 1982), 255 –69 (on Pyrrhonism) and 269 –79 (on Academic 
scepticism)  
Popkin charts the Renaissance rediscovery of Greek scepticism  and its influence on subsequent thinkers in his 
well-known history, which has been largely responsible for the now general appreciation of the sceptical 
tradition’s immense impact on modern thought:  
 Popkin, Richard H., The History of Scepticism from Eras mus to Spinoza  (Berkeley and London: University 
of California Press, 1979)  
Popkin is also the author of what is probably the best -known discussion of Hume’s scepticism, referred to by a 
number of the works discussed below:  
 Popkin, Richard H., ‘David Hume:  His Pyrrhonism and his Critique of Pyrrhonism’, Philosophical 
Quarterly  1 (1951), 385 –407; repr. in V. C. Chappell (ed.), Hume  (London and Melbourne: Macmillan, 
1968), 53 –98 and in Tweyman (1995), vol. ii, 161 –87 
Although Hume himself in Enquiry  XII repea tedly describes Pyrrhonism as ‘excessive’ and criticises it as 
unlivable ( E 159–61), Popkin points out that his understanding of it is incomplete, failing to take into account 
the Pyrrhonian principles — expounded by Sextus Empiricus — of living according to nature and accepting 
‘evident’ appearances undogmatically. However Sextus can still be criticised for not going far enough, and 
Popkin argues that Hume’s position, which goes much further in accepting the natural inevitability of almost all  
our beliefs,  is in fact the only consistent development of Pyrrhonism. The Pyrrhonian should admit that both our 
beliefs and our doubts are determined by nature, and might well vary, according to our mood or situation, quite 
independently of their epistemological meri t. Nature does not allow us to suspend judgement, even about 
non-evident things, just because a belief is shown to lack rational warrant. So ironically, ancient Pyrrhonism is 
too dogmatically rationalistic in failing to separate the issue of warrant from t hat of belief. Popkin believes that 
Hume is right to criticise it as unlivable, and as a recipe for madness rather than a path to the ataraxia  
(i.e. quietude or unperturbedness) which is its avowed aim. A more detailed discussion of the livability of 
traditional Pyrrhonism comes to a similar conclusion:  
 Burnyeat, M. F., ‘Can the Skeptic Live His Skepticism?’ in Malcolm Schofield, Myles Burnyeat and 
Jonathan Barnes (eds.), Doubt and Dogmatism  (Oxford and New York: Clarendon Press, 1980), 20 –53; 
repr. in Myl es Burnyeat (ed.), The Skeptical Tradition  (Berkeley and London: University of California 
Press, 1983), 117 –48 
Burnyeat starts by criticising Hume for assuming without argument ‘that it is impossible to live without reason 
and belief’. But after a close ex amination of Sextus’ views, including his crucial distinction between belief and 
merely accepting ‘appearances’, Burnyeat concludes that this distinction breaks down for ‘appearances’ that are 
non-perceptual. The sceptic cannot plausibly deny that these  ‘appearances’ — which he himself accepts to be 
part of a natural life — are epistemic and therefore instances of belief. Living without such beliefs would 
involve a radical self -detachment which does indeed seem humanly impossible.   47 The sceptical tradition is  given a historically informed though predominantly philosophical treatment by 
Hookway, who agrees with Popkin in seeing Hume’s position as essentially a development of Pyrrhonism, but a 
development that makes room not only for belief, but also for science : 
 Hookway, Christopher, Scepticism  (London and New York: Routledge, 1990), ch. 5  
On Hookway’s account, Hume accepts that Pyrrhonian arguments are unanswerable and, like Sextus, rejects 
‘the propect of achieving an active rational control over our reasonin gs’ (p.  106); instead we must simply yield 
passively to the beliefs that we naturally find ourselves holding. Hume also follows Sextus in recommending 
the virtues of detachment from our cognitive faculties on practical grounds, though whereas Sextus sees s uch 
detachment — and consequent abandonment of belief and theoretical enquiry — as a route to tranquil ataraxia , 
Hume differs in taking both belief and theoretical enquiry to be part of our nature, so that Pyrrhonian 
tranquillity is unattainable. The best we can achieve is to make our speculations more tentative, to limit their 
scope, and — by leaving their most worrying conclusions behind when we quit our study — to prevent them 
from impinging undesirably on common life. Many similar themes are explored in  a rich paper which has as 
much to say about Hume’s scepticism as it does about the Dialogues  in particular:  
 Penelhum, Terence, ‘Hume’s Skepticism and the Dialogues ’, in David Fate Norton, Nicholas Capaldi, and 
Wade L. Robison (eds.), McGill Hume Studies  (San Diego: Austin Hill Press, 1979), 253 –78; repr. in 
Tweyman (1995), vol. v, 126 –49 
Penelhum, like Hookway, sees Hume as advocating a limitation on ‘distant and high enquiries’ ( E 162) not on 
the ground that they are unnatural (for on the contrary, they are all too natural), but rather, to avoid the anxiety 
that such enquiries can cause. However he finds a major contrast between Hume’s response to this problem in 
the Treatise  and the Enquiry  — in the Treatise , the damaging effects of excessive scepticism are to be limited 
by being confined to the study (thus implying the ‘on -again -off-again’ scepticism which McCormick’s paper in 
§3c above argues is a misinterpretation), whereas in the Enquiry , Hume recommends instead a limitation of 
subject -matter. The onl y justification Penelhum can discern for this later limitation is the notion that our 
cognitive faculties are so imperfect that we should avoid any reliance on them wherever we are able to do so. 
However he finds this justification objectionably ad hoc, for some people might find speculation about 
theological and metaphysical matters psychologically unavoidable, and as much a part of their nature as more 
down -to-earth theoretical enquiry. This ‘consistency problem’ for the mitigated scepticism of the Enquir y 
seems particularly hard to evade if Hume takes theism to be a natural belief, as Penelhum goes on to maintain 
(though he slightly modifies this view in a later paper — for discussion, see §9b above).  
Fogelin answers Penelhum’s consistency problem by argu ing that Hume does not intend his mitigated 
scepticism to be justified  at all — no such justification could possibly be available, because from a theoretical 
point of view Hume’s scepticism is wholly unmitigated (as demonstrated in particular by his ‘scept icism with 
regard to reason’ of Treatise  I. iv. 1). Instead, the mitigation is simply a causal  outcome of our confrontation 
with Pyrrhonism, in that when we come to appreciate the force of the sceptical arguments, this will naturally 
have the effect  of ins tilling us with modesty, and inducing us to restrict our enquiries in accordance with 
Hume’s recommendation:  
 Fogelin, Robert J., ‘The Tendency of Hume’s Skepticism’, in Myles Burnyeat (ed.), The Skeptical 
Tradition  (Berkeley and London: University of Cali fornia Press, 1983), 397 –412 
Stroud takes a similar approach, interpreting Hume’s mitigated scepticism as ‘a state we can find ourselves in, 
when the reflections leading to excessive scepticism have been tempered or mitigated by our natural 
inclinations.’ (p. 280):   48  Stroud, Barry, ‘Hume’s Scepticism: Natural Instincts and Philosophical Reflection’, Philosophical Topics  
19 (1991), 271 –91; repr. in Owen (2000), 471 –91 
However Stroud emphasises that Hume’s mitigated sceptic is not simply the Pyrrhonian slave o f nature 
described by Popkin. An unreflective peasant can equally well live naïvely in accordance with our natural 
instincts, and what distinguishes the Humean sceptic is a reflective appreciation and acceptance of our 
subservience to these instincts. Such  an acceptance can be an enduring state, very different from the 
‘on-again -off-again’ scepticism seen by Popkin and others as the essence of Hume’s scepticism. Moreover this 
state can lead to something like the ataraxia  sought by the ancient Pyrrhonians, t hus providing a basis for the 
pragmatic recommendation of Humean philosophy which Stroud finds in the Treatise  but even more clearly in 
the Enquiry  (Sections  I, V and XII). This pragmatic theme is developed at greater length by:  
 Owen, David, ‘Philosophy a nd the Good Life: Hume’s Defence of Probable Reasoning’, Dialogue  35 
(1996), 485 –503 
 Owen, David, Hume’s Reason  (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1999), ch.  9 especially 
205–6, 211 –23 
Owen takes very seriously Hume’s recommendation in the Treatise  that since we cannot help pursuing 
enquiries beyond the realm of common life (a premise which seems in some tension with the mitigated 
scepticism of the Enquiry ), ‘we ought only to deliberate concerning the choice of our guide, and ought to prefer 
that which is safest and most agreeable’ ( T 271). Owen interprets Hume’s earlier discussions of probable 
reasoning — and even his apparently approving descriptions of the inferential practices of ‘wise’ and 
‘reasonable’ people and of ‘philosophers’ — as havi ng nothing whatever to do with questions of justification or 
warrant (cf. §5c and §6c above). They are normative only in the sense of clarifying what ‘correct’ probable 
reasoning involves, and it is then a quite different question whether such reasoning is  to be preferred to any 
alternatives (e.g. Roman augury by the inspection of a sacrificed sheep’s entrails, which can also be done either 
‘correctly’ or ‘incorrectly’ — see Owen’s book p.  206). Hume’s justification of ‘philosophy’ comes later and is 
purely  pragmatic, based on the observation that such philosophy is more useful and agreeable than superstition, 
and therefore conforms to the Humean conception of the virtues. Owen, like Stroud, puts particular weight on 
Section  I of the Enquiry  in developing hi s pragmatic interpretation. For a contrasting view, see §4 of Chapter  1 
of this volume, which interprets that section as arguing for ‘abstruse philosophy’ more on the basis of a search 
after truth  than a quest for calm.  
Most of the works discussed above st ress Hume’s continuity with the sceptical tradition and with 
Pyrrhonism in particular. However Hume left his own mark on that tradition, and in summing up this distinctive 
contribution Hookway (pp.  104–5) emphasises three particular aspects of his thought,  namely his emphasis on 
the irresistibility of belief, his ambition to develop a naturalistic science of man, and his conceptual concern 
with the limits of our ideas. We have already seen that the first of these plays a central role in several of the 
works  mentioned above, but the second and third have figured less prominently in discussions of his scepticism. 
However Hume’s naturalistic ambitions assume centre stage in a paper which contends that although his 
conclusions  were sceptical, his aims  were not:  
 Bell, Martin and McGinn, Marie, ‘Naturalism and Scepticism’, Philosophy  65 (1990), 399 –418 
Bell and McGinn argue that Hume’s philosophy is intended not so much as a development  of scepticism as a 
rejection  of it, with his fundamental objective being to ac hieve a naturalistic understanding of our ordinary 
beliefs that would allow us to see them as entirely legitimate. In the case of induction, they maintain, he 
succeeds: his account of why we are convinced by causal inferences enables us to see that we are neither absurd 
nor arbitrary in founding our beliefs on such inferences, and paves the way for a confident endorsement of  49 inductive method. But the anti -sceptical project misfires when Hume’s explanation of our belief in the 
continued and distinct existenc e of body leads him to the conclusion that this belief is not only unsupported by 
reason but is actually false, and hence is a belief that we ought not to hold (cf.  §10a above). Bell and McGinn 
therefore interpret the apparent dismay provoked by this resul t in the Treatise  (e.g. T 217–18, 265 –6) as entirely 
genuine, and not merely a dialectical prelude to a premeditated pragmatic resolution, nor a dramatic wallowing 
in the excesses of scepticism. However the contrast they draw, between Hume’s constructive t reatment of 
causal reasoning on the one hand and his destructive conclusions with regard to the external world on the other, 
is implicitly contested by Robison, who focuses on the third distinctive feature of Hume’s scepticism identified 
by Hookway, namely  its conceptual aspect:  
 Robison, Wade L., ‘David Hume: Naturalist and Meta -sceptic’, in Donald W. Livingston and James T. 
King (eds.), Hume: a Re -evaluation  (New York: Fordham University Press, 1976), 23 –49; repr. in 
Tweyman (1995), vol.  v, 36 –55 
Robison sees the core of Hume’s scepticism as involving the realisation that the human mind is essentially 
incoherent : we cannot help applying to our experience various concepts — notably that of continuing objects 
distinct from our perceptions, and objective nece ssary connexions between those objects — which his analyses 
demonstrate to have no legitimate application to it. Even Hume himself, after undertaking these analyses and 
proving that the concepts in question are illegitimate, cannot help applying them, so t here is no philosophical 
solution to this ‘meta -scepticism’: all we can do is resort to ‘carelessness and inattention’ ( T 218; cf. T 268) and 
ignore the problem. This indeed seems to be Hume’s prescription in some relevant parts of the Treatise , but 
obviou sly such an account fits less comfortably with the Enquiry , which ends not on a note of despair, but with 
a positive endorsement of empirical science within the bounds of a relatively mild mitigated scepticism. 
However the principal sources of Hume’s conce ptual scepticism — his Copy Principle, and his attack on the 
supposed abstract ideas of primary qualities — are still present, so how are we to explain his apparent 
equanimity in the later work? Assuming that this is not a mere ignoring of inconsistency, w e seem to have three 
main possibilities. The simplest is to follow Stroud in seeing Hume as calmly accepting ‘the whimsical 
condition of mankind’ ( E 160), now that the initial anxiety of his sceptical enquiries in the Treatise  has 
subsided. The second is t o find ways in which the conceptual scepticism of the Enquiry  can coexist with that 
work’s endorsement of science; I have tried in §9.2 and §12 of Chapter  4 to sketch how such an account might 
go, accepting the legitimacy  of causal concepts despite the sub jective origin of the relevant idea, and mitigating 
the negative impact of the confused notion of matter by seeing this confusion as in part a help to inductive 
science (in revealing the lack of any alternative) rather than as a hindrance. The third possib ility is to downplay 
Hume’s conceptual scepticism, so that a notion’s failure to conform to his theory of ideas remains compatible 
with that notion’s acceptability; as we have already seen in §7c and §10a above, this is the essence of the 
‘sceptical realis m’ championed by Wright:  
 Wright, John P., ‘Hume’s Academic Scepticism: A Reappraisal of His Philosophy of Human 
Understanding’, Canadian Journal of Philosophy  16 (1986), 407 –35; repr. in Tweyman (1995), vol.  ii, 
222–47 and in Owen (2000), 303 –31 
Wright fo rcefully rejects Popkin’s Pyrrhonist interpretation, arguing that Hume’s writings in fact exemplify 
only one prominent Pyrrhonist theme, namely the conflict between our natural judgements (the ‘noumena’) and 
the way things appear to us (the ‘phenomena’, in cluding the nature of our impressions and ideas). In other 
respects — his denial that suspension of belief is possible or that it would lead to tranquillity, his quest for a 
science of man, and his approval of probabilities — Hume leans instead towards Cic ero’s ‘academic’ 
scepticism, a tendency which becomes fully explicit in the Enquiry . All of these threads come together in 
Hume’s account of how the imagination leads us mechanically to accept probable beliefs and to make natural 
judgements beyond the real m of our ideas. These natural judgements include the inconceivable ‘suppositions’  50 of causal power and external existence, which Wright discusses briefly in this article but at much greater length 
in his book (see §7c and §10a above).  
Leaving aside the spec ific topics of induction and the external world (§5d and §10a above), most 
contemporary discussions of scepticism have moved far from specific Humean concerns. Hookway’s book 
mentioned above provides a useful general overview, but says relatively little ab out some specific issues that 
have recently come to prominence, such as Putnam’s semantic externalism (which can ground an argument 
from the theory of reference that some sceptical claims can be meaningful only if they are false) and Goldman’s 
reliabilism (which can be used to deny the inference from ‘internalist’ doubt to lack of knowledge — see 
Costa’s paper in §6c above for the suggestion that such reliabilism has roots in Hume’s own thought). These 
developments, and others, are explored from a variety o f perspectives in:  
 DeRose, Keith and Warfield, Ted A., Skepticism: A Contemporary Reader  (Oxford and New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1999)  
Particularly helpful is DeRose’s introduction, which briefly sketches the issues and thus provides a context for 
the subsequent papers together with a summary of their main themes.  