Response to “A Priority, Reason, and Induction in Hume”  
Peter Millican, University of Leeds  
 
Over the last three years Hume’s use of the term “a priori” has suddenly become very topical.  Three 
discussions, by Stephen Buckle, myself, and Houston Smit, all focusing  on Hume’s  argument 
concerning induction in Section IV of the Enquiry , have independently picked up on this question , 
which seems previously to have gone almost unnoticed.1  That there is an issue her e can be seen by 
examining what Hume says when c onsidering the foundation of our inferences concerning matter of 
fact; why, for example, we expect a billiard ball to move in a particular way when struck by another:  
“I shall venture to affirm, as a general proposition, which admits of no exception, that the knowledge of 
[cause and effect] is not, in any instance, attained by reasonings a priori ; but arises entirely from 
experience …  Let an object be presented to a man of ever so strong natural reason and abilities; if that 
object be entirely new to him, he will not be able, by the most accurate examination of its sensible 
qualities, to discover any of its causes or effects.  …   No object ever discovers, by the qualities which 
appear to the senses, either the causes, which produced it, or the effects, whic h will arise from it; nor can 
our reason, unassisted by experience, ever draw any inference concerning real existence and matter of 
fact.”  (E 27, 4.6)  
In this passage Hume is clearly allowing an object’s “qualities which appear to the senses” as being 
available to Reason “unassisted by experience”.  So what he counts as “experience”  seems essentially 
to involve some  memory of prior experience , rather than merely  current experience . 
 Various interpretations are possible .  The line I took in my paper “Hume’s  Sceptical Doubts 
concerning Induction”, published in my 2002  collection , took Hume’s notion of “a priori” in this 
context as being only minimally different in spirit from the modern notion, and str aightforwardly 
motivated by his enquiry into the foundatio n of our inferences from what we perceive :2 
“when [Hume] denies that some kind of knowledge or inference is a priori, he usually means not simply 
that it requires experience , but that it requires experience beyond mere perception of the objects 
concerned .  …  [according to  this] more relaxed Humean notion … a proposition counts as a priori if it 
can be known without appeal to any experience beyond what is currently being perceived  (and hence 
without any appeal to memory as opposed to sensation).”  ( Millican  2002, pp. 121 -2) 
                                                   
1 In a footnote on earlier discussions on Hume’s use of “a priori”, Buckle (2001), p. 42 refers only to two articles from the 
1960s, but neither of these focused on the usage in Enquiry  IV. 
2 I also linked this with my more general  claim that the notion of Reason with which Hume is concerned in Enquiry  IV is 
essentially perceptual , and an acknowledgement that in some other contexts he uses the stricter modern notion of a priority.   2 Buckle’s book Hume’s Enlightenment Tract , which appeared in 2001 while my own was going 
through the press, took a radically different line:  
“Hume’s unfamiliar use of ‘a priori’ makes sense if placed against a background of Aristotelian th ought: 
the inspection of the sensory properties of an object will properly be described as priori – as prior to 
experience – if by ‘experience’ we mean, not individual sensations, but the Aristotelian sense of 
connected experience of the world – experience s in the sense of ‘being experienced’, the fruit of extended 
contact with the world over time.”  (Buckle 2001, p. 42)  
Here I shall not discuss Buckle’s position, except to say that I find his interpretation of Enquiry  IV as 
primarily directed against Stoic  and Aristotelian positions wildly implausible both textually and 
historically.  Far more historically plausible is Houston Smit’s suggestion  that the Humean notion of a 
priority derives from that mentioned in the Port Royal Logic  and apparently used by Le ibniz, which is 
founded on a distinction between arguments from causes to effects, and those from effects to causes.   
Whether this can also make sense of Hume’s text s is the question  to be debated in what follows.  
Smit’s “from c auses” interpretati on of Hum ean a p riority  
The Port Royal Logic  mentions the notions of a priori and a posteriori only once, “in passing ”, 
explaining them as follows:  
“[There are some]  subjects whose truth [the mind] is capable of finding and understanding, either by 
proving effects by their causes, which is called an a priori  proof, or, on the contrary, by demonstrating 
causes by their effects, which is called an a posteriori  proof.”  (Arnaud and Nicole 1662, p. 233)  
In ascribing this notion of  a priority to Hume , Smit clarifies and expands on the Port Royal  
characterisation , and then goes on to develop it  in various ways : 
“‘Cause’ is here used in the broad Aristotelian sense of ‘ground’ or ‘explanatory factor’: the material 
cause (i.e., material constitution) of a statue, and not jus t its efficient cause, could constitute the starting 
point of an a priori proof.”  
“On this notion, to know the truth of a proposition a priori is to grasp how certain causes, or grounds, 
make that proposition true.  To know the truth of a proposition a pri ori, then, requires not just establishing 
that the proposition is true, by appeal to grounds that suffice to show that it is true.  It requires, rather, 
knowing why that proposition is true, by intellectually perceiving, as such, the grounds, or causes, th at 
make it true.”  
“What is distinctive of a priori proofs is … that they proceed by way of one’s grasp of how causes 
determine their effects – we might say, from a rational perception of the way the causality of a cause 
determines some effect.”  
“to prove a  proposition from the cause, or ground, that makes it true just is to explain why it is true, as 
against merely establishing that it is true.”  
“to adopt this notion of the a priori is to conceive of a priori proofs as resting on grounds that we 
apprehend, not through experience, but rather through the operation of our reason – our faculty for 
appreciating why certain propositions are true.”   3 Perhaps the best sort of candidate for such  rational perception of causal grounds would come from 
applied mathematics,  for example  an engineer’s understanding of the mechanical principles that enable 
a bridge to support some particular weight.  But there is a n apparent  problem in Hume ’s countenancing  
this as “a priori ”, because h e famously  denies that any causal relations  are known a priori, and 
explicitly extends this denial even to the principles of mechanics.3  To his credit, Smit himself presents 
such an example and tackles the  issue  head on : 
“the engineer’s reasoning is a priori, insofar as it is based on her rational  perception of the way in which 
the geometrical structure of the bridge makes it the case that it has the load bearing properties in question.  
It is, however, not purely a priori.  …  insofar as it relies on … knowledge of the causal properties of the 
materials, the engineer’s a priori proof relies on, and incorporates, antecedent a posteriori proofs.”  
This deflects the immediate objection , but it can be pushed fur ther, as we shall see below . 
Is Smit’s “from c auses”  notion clear and d istinct?  
An initial  worry about Smit’s position is that his preferred notion of a priority may, at least as ascribed 
to Hume, collapse under analysis into something very like the modern notion.  First, Hume rejects the 
Aristotelian categori sation of types of cause, stating expl icitly “ that all causes are of the same kind, and 
that, in particular, there is no foundation for that distinction which we sometimes make … betwixt 
efficient causes, and formal, and material, and exemplary, and final causes ” (T 171, 1.3.14.32).  
Secondly,  the one type of causation  that Hume accepts  – namely, efficient  causation – he takes as the 
foundation of all reasoning concerning matter of fact , fundamentally distinguishing this  experiential 
causal reasoning from abstract reasoning concerning relations  of ideas .  So it  seems odd that he should  
operat e with a notion that embraces together “proving effects by their causes” with “proofs … resting 
on grounds that we apprehend, not through experience, but rather through the operation of our reason”.  
 Another  way of pressing this point is to pursue the issue of the engineer.  Smit  grants that her 
reasoning is not purely  a priori, but then it is natural to ask: “what kind of reasoning would  be purely a 
priori?”.  Since Hume takes causal relations to be knowable  only through experience, it seems to 
follow that any reasoning whatever that relies on such relations – whether it proceeds from causes to 
effects or from effects to causes – must be classed by him as not purely a priori, even on Smit’s 
understanding of the notion.  So it appears that Smit’s Humean apriority divides, under analysis, in 
ways that make it hard to sustain both its coherence and its distinctness from the modern notion:  
 
                                                   
3 For the general denial, see the first quotation in  this paper.  For the treatment of applied mathematics in particular, see 
E 31, 4.13.   4  “relations of 
ideas”, e.g. logic, 
pure mathematics  “mixed 
mathematics”, 
e.g. mechanics  “deduction” of 
effects from 
causes  “induction” of 
causes from 
effects  
modern “a priori”  
(knowable independently of all 
experience  whatever )     
Port Royal “a priori”  
(founded on reasoning from 
causes or grounds to “effects”)  Given the Arist otelian taxonomy, all of these 
types of reasoning can be categori sed together 
as involving “causes” of various kinds.   
Smit’s Humean “a priori”  
(founded on reasoning from 
causes or rational grounds)  Reasoning from 
rational 
grounds  Reasoning from 
empirical ly 
established laws  Ordinary causal 
reasoning from 
causes to effects  Ordinary causal 
reasoning from 
effects to causes  
Smit’s  “pure a priori”  
(founded on reasoning from 
causes or rational grounds alone)      
 
It is not clear that Smit’s general characteris ation of Humean a priority represents a coherent position, 
because it relies on categorising together types of reasoning that on Humean principles are quite 
distinct, and also involves  distinguishing two types of reasoning – from causes to effects and from  
effects to causes – that Hume often categorises together.4  But if Smit avoids this objection by focusing 
instead on his stricter pure  notion of a priori ty, then it becomes  doubtful  whether this can remain 
distinct from the modern notion, given Hume’s ins istence that absolutely no knowledge of causal 
relations can be completely independent of experience.  
Is the “from c auses” notion Humean?  
I think Smit  has raised a genuine and interesting issue in highlighting the “from  causes” notion of a 
priority within Hume’s writings, though consistently with the discussion above, I believe the most 
convincing  examples of this occur in contexts where Hume is treating a priority as a relative  notion, 
contrasting  some “prior” general empirical knowledge of causal relation s with specific observation of 
“posterior” effects.  Such contexts occur at various points in Books II and III of the Treatise , the Moral 
Enquiry  and the Essays  (T 334, 2.2.2.6 -7; T 571, 3.2.12.4; M 230, 5.43; “That Politics may be Reduced 
to a Science”, para. 6).  However Hume’s usage here closely mirrors – in both significance and to 
                                                   
4 Particularly explicitly at T 113, 1.3.9.12; T 166, 1.3.14.22; and T 225, 1.4.4.1, in which Hume talks respectively of “our 
inferences …”, “that determination of the tho ught to pass …”, and “the customary transition …”, but in every case 
continues “… from causes to effects, and from effects to causes”.   5 some extent in subject -matter – his account of the “universally received [but] at bottom, erroneous , or 
at least, superficial ” notion of “reason” discussed in the long footno te in Enquiry  V (E 43-4 n., 4.5 n.) 
to which Smit usefully draws attention.5  But unlike Smit I do not take this to be  the same notion of 
reason that is operative in Enquiry  IV or the Dialogues , where Hume is considering fundamental 
epistemological questio ns and is therefore well advised  to avoid such vague and defective  notions.  
 To turn first to the Dialogues , Smit finds evidence of his “from causes” notion in Demea’s 
claim that his “a priori” theistic argument has an advantage over Cleanthes’ “a  posterio ri” argument  
because it has  the potential to prove the deity’s infinity .  But this evidence is very double -edged, 
because Demea’s claim of advantage is equally comprehensible  – and arguably more so – on the 
modern   understanding of a priority.6  Demea’s po int is primarily a negative one against Cleanthes’ 
argument from God’s supposed (finite) effects, and this point is equally effective whether Demea  
views his own rival argument as running from ultimate causes to effects, or as being founded on 
principles t hat are known independently of experience.   Moreover I would suggest that Cleanthes’ 
subsequent rejection  of Demea’s argument points in a direction opposite to that which Smit favours:  
“I shall begin with observing, that there is an evident absurdity in pr etending to demonstrat e a matter of 
fact, or to prov e it by any arguments a priori .  Nothing is demonstrable, unless the contrary implies a 
contradiction.  Nothing, that is distinctly conceivable, implies a contradiction.  Whatever we conceive as 
existent,  we can also conceive as non -existent.  …”  ( D 189, cf. E 35, 4.18 ) 
This seems to connect something’s being provable a priori with the idea of its being demonstrable,7 
and being such that its contrary implies a contradiction.  But this seems to be far more  closely related 
to the modern notion of a priority than to Smit’s, because if a proposition’s contrary is known to imply 
a contradiction, then it can be known to be true independently of experience, whether or not this 
knowledge involves causation or rati onal grounding in the way required by Smit’s notion.8 
                                                   
5 If Hume indeed intends his criticism of the notion of “reason” in this footnote to apply to the notion of a priority as  used in 
the contexts mentioned, then this would provide evidence that, although Smit is importantly correct in seeing Hume as 
inheriting the “from causes” notion, nevertheless he is wrong in seeing Hume as retaining it in his central arguments.  If so, 
then Hume could perhaps justly be credited with being the true source of the modern notion of a priority, precisely through 
his explicit recognition and rejection of the older notion.  Kant has often been ascribed this honour in the past (e.g. in the 
Edwards  Encyclopedia ), a major irony if, as Smit suggests, he actually continued to hold to the “from causes” notion.  
6 “Arguably more so” because the notion of reason explained by Hume in the Enquiry  V footnote would not have the 
advantage claimed, being essenti ally a posteriori and thus unable to yield an infinite conclusion.  
7 Not to be confused with the idea of its being merely the conclusion of a demonstrative argument – see Millican (2002) 
§7.1 for a discussion of what Hume means by “demonstrative”.  
8 It mig ht be suggested that whenever a proposition’s contrary is seen to involve a contradiction, this in itself involves the 
grasp of rational grounds that would satisfy Smit’s notion of a priority.  However this suggestion would serve to highlight 
the worry abo ve, that under critical analysis his notion may lose its apparently distinctive character.  If the Port Royal 
Logic ’s notion of a priority can be stretched so far than an indirect proof by reductio ad absurdum  is counted as a proof 
“from causes to effects” , then it is hard to see what essential character it retains, distinct from the modern notion.   6  Perhaps significantly, the same nexus of concepts plays a role much earlier in Part  ii of the 
Dialogues , in which Philo gives as clear a statement as one could wish of the impossibility of a priori 
knowledge of the world, in what is recognisably the modern  sense:  
“Were a man to abstract from every thing which he knows or has seen, he would be altogether incapable, 
merely from his own ideas, to determine what kind of scene the universe must be, or to giv e the 
preference to one state or situation above another.  For as nothing, which he clearly conceives, could be 
esteemed impossible or implying a contradiction, every chimera of his fancy would be upon an equal 
footing; nor could he assign any just reason,  why he adheres to one idea or system, and rejects the others, 
which are equally possible.”  (D145)  
Philo then develops this thesis by relaxing the constraints to include  immediate observation : 
“Again; after he opens his eyes, and contemplates the world, a s it really is, it would be impossible for 
him, at first, to assign the cause of any one event …  He might set his fancy a rambling; and she might 
bring him in an infinite variety of reports and representations.  These would all be possible; but being all 
equally possible, he would never, of himself, give a satisfactory account for his preferring one of them to 
the rest.  Experience alone can point out to him the true cause of any phenomenon.”  (D145 -6) 
This passage  very obviously echo es Enquiry  IV Part i, and hence provides significant evidence that the 
term “a priori” in that section of the  Enquiry  is to be interpreted accordingly  – as a slightly relaxed 
variant of the modern notion , rather than Smit’s radical ly different “from causes” notion . 
Is the “from  causes” notion required to make s ense of Enquiry IV ? 
To turn finally – and all too briefly – to the text of Enquiry  IV itself,9 Smit argues persuasively that his 
proposed notion of a priority could  illuminate Hume’s  argument concerning induction at variou s 
points, and would in particular establish  causation as central to that argument (thus undermining  a 
suggestion made in my 1995, pp. 191 -2, and 2002, pp. 141 -2).  My reservations about this aspect of his 
paper would overlap with points already made about his characterisation of the notion, so I shall not 
pursue them further here.  But suppose we accept Smit’s positive case for the benefits of understanding 
Hume’s famous argument in his terms; it is still unclear to me whether he believes that this can be 
complemented with a negative case against rival ways of understanding it such as my own.  My final 
question is, then: are there any stages of Hume’s argument concerning induction which cannot  be 
made sense of given the sort of interpretation of “a priori” t hat I favour?  I don’t believe there are, but 
would invite Smit to take up this challenge in our discussion.  
                                                   
9 Anyone familiar with the long papers Millican (1995) and (2002) will no doubt consider it a mercy to see me here 
spending so little time on the discussion of Enquiry  IV!  7 Conclusion  
To conclude by pulling to gether the questions posed by my three last sections:  
1. I would find it helpful if Smit could spell out in de tail his understanding of apriority as it 
applies in Hume’s philosophy , with concrete examples to highlight situations in which it comes 
apart from the modern notion (or from my suggested slight relaxation of the modern notion).  
When the notion is duly cl arified in the light of the sorts of points made  above , will there in fact 
remain any cases that , from a Humean point of view,  would straightforwardly count  as “a 
priori” under one notion  but not under the other?  
2. If such cases do remain in principle , do any of them actually  occur in Hume’ s texts ?  Are there, 
for example, any propositions that Hume describes as “a priori”, which are so on the “from 
causes” notion but not on the modern notion (or its relaxation), and which cannot be explained 
away as insig nificant in the light of the “erroneous, or at least, superficial” distinction that he 
rejects in his Enquiry  V footnote?  
3. Smit has made an interesting and plausible positive case for understanding a priority within 
Enquiry  IV in a way that makes essenti al reference to causation.  But in order to establish his 
position there i s also a negative case to be made against rival interpretations.  Are there in fact 
any stage s of Hume’s argument that fail to  make sense if “a priori” is understood  in the way I 
favour, as meaning “knowable independently of any experience beyond what is currently being 
perceived?”  If so, then these are  presumably  likely to depend on cases in w hich the two 
notions come apart, so this query is somewhat  dependent on the previous two . 
Postscript  
I have focused above on objections to Smit’s interpretation of a priority in its application to Hume .  
But even if these objections are correct , this does not in itself impugn Smit’s “over -arching concern … 
to explicate Kant’s reply to Hume’s pro blem of induction” (n. 18) in such  terms – it is after all entirely 
possible that Kant should have interpreted  Hume’s use of “a priori” as Leibnizian, even if he was 
thereby  misunderstanding  Hume’s argument.  This might indeed possibly help to explain why Kant’s 
supposed reply to Hume is so spectacularly ineffective, founded as it is on transcendental arguments 
which – even if they work on their own terms in revealing some ultimate transcendental necessity for 
the uniformity of the phenomenal world (which I  very much doubt) – are essentially backward -looking 
and therefore do nothing to solve Hume’s epistemological question about the future.  According to  8 Kant, we know that the world is conditioned in such and such a way because we have (i.e. have had ) 
experi ence of such and such a type, and experience of this type would be impossible were the world 
not so conditioned.  Suppose we accept this.  But still nothing (apart perhaps from God or a dogmatic 
slumber) protects the Kantian from the prospect of an imminen t descent into chaos in which such 
experience suddenly and unexpectedly becomes impossible.  So even if the transcendental argument is 
successful, it does nothing whatever to solve Hume’s  problem of induction.  
 
References  
Arnauld, Antoine and Nicole, Pierr e (1662), Logic of the Arts of Thinking , translated and edited by Jill Vance Buroker, 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996 . 
Buckle, Stephen (2001), Hume’s Enlightenment Tract , Oxford: Clarendon Press . 
Millican, Peter (1995), “Hume’s Argument concern ing Induction: Structure and Interpretation”, in Stanley Tweyman (ed.), 
David Hume: Critical Assessments , London: Routledge, volume ii, pp. 91 -144; reprinted in David Owen (ed.), 
Hume: General Philosophy  (Ashgate, 2000), pp. 165 -218. 
Millican, Peter (2002) , “Hume’s Sceptical Doubts concerning Induction”, in Peter Millican (ed.), Reading Hume on Human 
Understanding: Essays on the First Enquiry , Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 107 -73. 
Smit, Houston (2003), “A Priority, Reason, and Induction in Hume”, paper submi tted for the July 2004 Hume Society 
Conference in Tokyo.  
 
Page references to the Treatise  and Enquiry  are to the Selby -Bigge editions, and paragraph numbers as in the recent Norton/ 
Beauchamp editions.  Page references to the Dialogues  are to the standard 1947 Kemp Smith edition.  