Hume on Induction and the Faculties 
 
Hume frequently talks of human faculties, and some of his most celebrated discussions are presented 
as revolving around the identification of which faculty – for example reason , the senses , or the 
imagination  – is responsible for some vital cognitive operation.  Perhaps the three most familiar 
examples concern induction, belief in the exte rnal world, and the foundation of morals: 
… the next question is, whether experience produ ces the idea by means of the understanding or 
imagination; whether we are determined by reason to  make the transition, or by a certain association 
and relation of perceptions.  ( T 1.3.6.4) 
The subject, then, of our presen t enquiry, is concerning the causes  which induce us to believe in the 
existence of body:  … we … sha ll consider, whether it be the senses , reason , or the imagination , that 
produces the opinion of a continu’d  or of a distinct  existence.  ( T 1.4.2.2) 
… we need only consider, whether it be possible, from reason alone, to distinguish betwixt moral good 
and evil, or whether there must concur some other principles to enable us to make that distinction.  
(T 3.1.1.3-4) 
There has been a controversy started of late … concerning the general foundation of MORALS ; whether 
they be derived from reason, or from SENTIMENT  …  ( M 1.3) 
This gives the impression that faculty psychology plays a major role in Hume’s philosophy, and 
strongly suggests that clarifying his view of the f aculties will be crucial to understanding some of his 
key philosophical positions. 
1.  Hume on induction: survey and agenda 
This suggestion is confirmed by the literature on Hume’s famous argument concerning induction, in 
which the main interpretative options can be most illuminatingly distinguished in terms of the view 
they take of Humean reason  (as understood both within the argument and elsewhere).  Thus the most 
distinctive feature of the interpretation put forwar d by Flew (1961) and Stove (1965, 1973) was their 
claim that Hume presupposes a deductivist  view of reason and rationality.  Later scholars such as 
Beauchamp et. al.  (1975, 1981), Arnold (1983), Broughton ( 1983) and Baier (1991) – while agreeing 
with Flew and Stove that a deductivist notion is ope rative within the famous argument – insisted that 
Hume’s aim in the argument is to undermine  that notion and replace it with another, more genuinely 
Humean, notion of reason that he employs elsewhere.  Both of these views were challenged by 
Millican (1995) and Garrett (1997), who pointed out th at the logic of the famous argument seemed not 
to make sense under a deductivist interpretation.   Millican preferred to see it as centred around a 
broadly perceptual  model of reason, while Garrett took Humean reason to be essentially a faculty of 
inference , and Hume’s conclusion to be a descriptive  account of how we reason – a contribution to 
cognitive science – rather than any sort of norma tive epistemology.  Owen (1999) concurred strongly 
with Garrett on this point, while identifying stepwise ratiocination invo lving Lockean “intermediate 
ideas”  as the crucial factor that characterises what Hu me here understands by “reason”.  Both Millican 
and Owen, however, agreed with Beauchamp and ot hers that for Hume “reason” is ambiguous, and 
that the notion operative within the famous argument pl ays the role of a target to be undermined, to be 
 2 replaced in due course by a genuinely Humean alterna tive.  Garrett, strongly attacking this general 
consensus, insisted that Humean “reason” is univocal, taking it to refer – both within the discussion of 
induction and elsewhere – to “the general faculty  of making inferences or producing arguments”. 
 Over the last decade or so, the interpretation of Hume on in duction has continued to revolve 
around his understanding of “reason” .  Noonan (1999) elaborated Ga rrett’s interpretation, Winkler 
(1999) insisted on a normative approach, while Millican (1998, 2002) – retreating on the ambiguity 
claim in response to Garrett (1998) – objected against any descriptive  inferential  view of Humean 
reason, that such a faculty would have to embrace bad as well as good inference.  Roth (2006) then 
focused on this objection, suggesting a possible re ply, while Loeb (2006) pressed it further against 
Garrett and Owen.  He also exploited it to  support a novel positive account based on an externalist  
conception of rationality, although Beebee (2006) meanwh ile appealed to rather similar considerations 
to defend an account similar to Owen’s.  Milli can responded against these new approaches in his 
(2007), and most recently, Allison (2008) has joined him in emphasising reason as perception , while 
agreeing with Garrett and Owen that a focus on inference  dominates the famous argument. 
 Thus the notion of reason  continues to play a central role in the interpretation of the logic of 
Hume’s argument, and it also features e xplicitly in that argument’s conclusion: 
… not only our reason fails us in the discovery of the ultimate connexion  of causes and effects, but even 
after experience has inform’d us of their constant conjunction , ’tis impossible for us to satisfy ourselves 
by our reason, why we shou’d extend that experience beyond those particular instances, which have fallen under our observation.  ( T 1.3.6.11) 
When the mind, therefore, passes fro m the idea or impression of one object to the idea or belief of 
another, it is not determin’d by reason, but by certa in principles, which associ ate together the ideas of 
these objects, and unite them in the imagination.  ( T 1.3.6.12) 
The interpretation of this key result of what Hume would later (in his 1740 Abstract ) call the “Chief 
Argument” of the Treatise  clearly depends crucially on his view of “reason”.  Is this result to be 
understood as (at least in part) normative  – a denial that induction is rationally well-founded in some 
sense – or just causally descriptive  – a denial that induction is caused by reasoning?1  If the result is 
normative, then is Hume here assuming that rational well-foundedness requires deductive certainty 
(e.g. Stove), or some kind of rational perception (e .g. Millican)?  If the result is purely descriptive, 
then is he denying that induction is caused by meta-reasoning  (e.g. Garrett), or that induction proceeds 
by stepwise ratiocination  (e.g. Owen)?  All of these options will carry different implications for the 
interpretation of Hume’s philosophy, bot h within the famous argument and beyond. 
                                                      
1 It is important to note that a normative interpretation is also, typically, causally descriptive.  Indeed Hume has 
traditionally been interpreted as arguing that precisely because  induction cannot be justified normatively, it follows 
that our inductive inferences cannot be explained as resulting from a faculty of rational insight, and must therefore  be 
causally explained in another way (i.e. as resulting from the associative tendencies of the imagination).  Hence the 
recent tendency to characterise the style of interpretation proposed by Garrett and Owen as though these were specially distinctive in being causal – through epithets such as “ the causal/explanatory reading” (Roth 2006, p. 106) or “ the 
causal interpretation” (Kail 2007, p. 44) – risks fundame ntally misleading the reader.  Another often crude and 
unilluminating, but regrettably very common, categorisation of  interpretations is in terms of whether or not they 
portray Hume as “sceptical” about induction: for a comment on this see note 72 in §7.3 below.  3  “Reason” is not the only faculty reference in Hume’s  texts that stands in need of clarification.  
Often he expresses very similar points in terms of both “reason” and “the understanding”, as for 
example when stating the conclusion of his argument concerning induction in the Enquiry : 
 This transition of thought from th e cause to the effect proceeds not fr om reason. It derives its origin 
altogether from custom and experience.  ( E 5.20) 
I say then, that, even after we have experience of the operations of cause and effect, our conclusions 
from that experience are not founded on reasoning, or any process of the understanding.  ( E 4.15) 
… in all reasonings from experience, there is a step taken by the mind, which is not supported by any 
argument or process of the understanding …  ( E 5.2) 
Is “the understanding” simply equivalent to “reason”  in such contexts?  Millican claims that it is, 
while Garrett denies this, explaining that the appear ance of equivalence is due to reason’s being “the 
main element of the understanding”.2  Again, Hume’s talk of “the imagination” is sometimes 
confusing and – by his own admission – ambiguous , while its relationship with reason (or the 
understanding) is unclear.  Sometimes he seems to treat the imagination as an entirely distinct and 
rival faculty, so that explaining some phenomenon – for example our belief in body – as due to one of 
them automatically excludes the other.  At othe r times, he treats reason (or the understanding) as 
encompassed within the imagination, as for example,  when he refers to “… the understanding, that is, 
… the general and more establish’d properties of the imagination” ( T 1.4.7.7). 
 Given all this controversy and po tential confusion, it is not surprising that the major parties to 
the interpretative debate, from Stove  to Garrett, and from Beauchamp to Owen, have laid great stress 
on understanding “Hume’s reason” as the key to understanding his philosophy of induction.3  But then 
it does seem particularly surprising that there has ap parently been no previous attempt to illuminate 
this debate by undertaking a detaile d investigation into Hume’s treatme nt of the faculties in general.  
This is therefore my agenda here: to investigate his use of faculty language throughout  his 
philosophical system, with the ultimate aim of she dding light on his view of induction in particular. 
 In order to remain as objective as possible, without prejudging controversial points in the 
induction debate, I shall start from a survey of the rele vant texts, ignoring entirely – at least initially – 
interpretative issues such  as whether Hume’s use of “reason” is normative or descriptive, ambiguous 
or univocal.  To minimise potential complications  arising from the development of his philosophy 
over time, I shall focus mainly on the Treatise , and try to build up a reliable picture of his view of the 
faculties when he was composing th at work.  Moreover within the Treatise , I shall first survey those 
passages where Hume himself explicitly  uses faculty language, which are therefore likely to be the 
                                                      
2 See Millican (1998), pp. 157-8 n. 7 and Garrett (1998), p. 194 n. 10, and cf. §3 below. 
3 Hume’s Reason  is the title of Owen’s book; Stove’s analysis is primarily devoted to identifying Hume’s “suppressed 
premise” of deductivism; Beauchamp et al.  introduced the key idea that Hume’s notion of “reason” is ambiguous; 
Garrett’s analysis is presented within a book chapter entitled “Reason and Induction”.  The first section of Millican (2002), following his introduction, is entitled “Descartes, Lock e, and the Ancient Tradition of Perceptual Reason”, and 
the last is entitled “Hume’s Reinterpretation of ‘Reason’”. 
 4 most self-conscious and authoritative.4  There is no guarantee that this will deliver the most 
informative passages, but it should serve to mini mise any bias from interpretative preconceptions. 
2.  Identifying the “Faculties” in the Treatise 
If we analyse Hume’s use of faculty terms in the Treatise , to try to establish a map of their 
“geography”,5 the picture that emerges is rather unclear.  Often he speaks of “the faculties of the 
mind” quite generally, without apparently pres upposing any particular organisation of them:6 
Our thought is still more variable than our sight; and all our other senses and faculties contribute to this 
change;  ( T 1.4.6.4) 
When the soul applies itself to the performance of an y action, or the conception of any object to which 
it is not accustomed, there is a certain unpliableness in the faculties …  ( T 2.3.5.2) 
Let us therefore run over all the faculties of the soul, and see which of them is exerted in our promises.  
(T 3.2.5.2) 
Sometimes, in the same spirit, he talks loosel y of “powers and faculties”, even ascribing such 
“faculties” to the imagination, which is itself generally treated as a faculty in its own right: 
When the imagination, from any extraordinary ferment of the blood and spirits, acquires such a vivacity 
as disorders all its powers and faculties …  ( T 1.3.10.9) 
Clearly this sort of language tells us very little a bout Hume’s perspective on faculty psychology.  But 
his references to particular faculties are more info rmative.  For example he frequently describes “the 
imagination” (or equivalently  “the fancy”) as a faculty, and sometimes “the memory”:7 
As all simple ideas may be separated by the imagination, and may be united again in what form it 
pleases, nothing would be more unaccountable than the operations of that faculty, were it not guided by some universal principles …  ( T 1.1.4.1) 
it is evident that the belief arises not merely from the transference of past to future, but from some 
operation of the fancy conjoined with it. This may lead us to conceive the manner in which that faculty 
enters into all our reasonings.  ( T 1.3.12.22) 
what is the memory but a faculty, by which we raise up the images of past perceptions?  ( T 1.4.6.18) 
Hume’s references to “the senses” are as plural faculties : 
To begin with the senses, it is evident these faculties are incapable of giving rise to the notion of the 
continued existence of their objects, …  ( T 1.4.2.3, cf. 1.4.2.5, 1.4.2.9) 
                                                      
4 That is, passages from the Treatise  which include either the word “faculty” or “faculties”.  One important point of 
this restriction is to reduce the search space (in an appropriate manner) so as to allow a comprehensive analysis within its bounds.  This analysis should therefore be potentially  repeatable by any reader with access to a searchable 
electronic edition of Hume’s Treatise , and can avoid the risk – or suspicion – of a “pick and mix” approach to the 
selection of texts.  I move beyond this restrict ion in the second half of §2.1 and from §3 onwards. 
5 This is an allusion to E 1.13, where Hume talks of “mental geography, or delineation of the distinct parts and powers 
of the mind”. 
6 Many more examples could be given here, for example from T Intro.4, 1.1.1.9, 1.2.3.10, 1.4.1.1, 1.4.2.33, 1.4.7.1, 
1.4.7.8, 2.3.8.13, and 3.3.4.4. 
7 Examples of the imagination being described explicitly as a faculty are legion, for example: T 1.3.7.7, 1.3.10.7, 
1.4.2.48, 1.4.4.1, 2.2.2. 22, 2.2.5.5, 2.2.7.4, 2.3.7.5-8, and 3.3.2.3.  Comparable further references to the memory are 
fewer, at T 1.1.3.3 and T 1.3.13.19.  5 When specifically itemised, he recognises the conve ntional five senses: “sight”, “touch”, “hearing”, 
“smell”, and “taste” ( T 1.4.4.12, 1.4.5.10).  He also, just once in the Treatise , uses the term “internal 
sense” ( T 3.1.1.25, cf. E 7.4; M 1.3, 1.9) for what he more usua lly calls “reflection”, which should 
presumably also be recognised as a Humean faculty (though he never explicitly calls it such).  In the 
Treatise  he standardly pairs “sensation” a nd “reflection” alongside each other,8 usually as sources of 
impressions (and hence ideas).  Although this syntactic  pairing might superficially seem to suggest a 
view of “reflection” as an independent faculty distinct  from “the senses”, its effect is rather to stress 
the fundamental similarity  Hume sees between them, following here straightforwardly in the footsteps 
of Locke: 
the Perception of the Operations of our own Minds  within us … which Operations, when the Soul 
comes to reflect on, and consider, do furnish the Understanding with another set of Ideas , which could 
not be had from things without: and such are, Perception , Thinking , Doubting , Believing , Reasoning , 
Knowing , Willing , and all the different actings of our own Minds; which we being conscious of, and 
observing in our selves, do from these recei ve into our Understandings, as distinct Ideas , as we do from 
Bodies affecting our Se nses.  This Source of Ideas , every Man has wholly in himself: And though it be 
not Sense, as having nothing to do with external Objects; yet it is very like it, and might properly enough be call’d internal Sense.
9  But as I call the other Sensation , so I call this REFLECTION  …  
These two, I say, viz. External, Material things, as the Objects of SENSATION ; and the Operations of 
our own Minds within, as the Objects of REFLECTION , are, to me, the only Or iginals, from whence all 
our Ideas  take their beginnings.  ( Essay  II i 4) 
Hence it seems appropriate to place reflection  within Hume’s general category of the senses , a 
category unified by the role of supplying impressions to the mind. 
 Turning now to what Reid would later call th e mind’s “active powers”, Hume here gives very 
little detail about the relevant mental geography, thoug h he explicitly describes “the will” as a faculty 
and also – just once – “the passions”: 
Beside these calm passions, which often determine th e will, there are certain violent emotions of the 
same kind, which have likewise a great influence on that faculty.  ( T 2.3.3.9) 
I have observ’d, that those two fa culties of the mind, the imagination and passions, assist each other in 
their operation, when their propensities are similar, and when they act upon the same object.  …  these 
two faculties of the passions and imag ination are connected together …  ( T 2.2.2.16)  
In this last passage Hume seems to be speaking of the passions as a faculty on ly in order to emphasise 
his point about their reciprocal influence with the imagination;10 his more general view of them is as a 
sub-category of “secondary impressions” or “impressions of reflection” ( T 1.1.2.1, 2.3.9.1).11  “ T h e  
will” is a much stronger candidate as a Humean faculty, being treated as such by most of his 
                                                      
8 See T 1.1.1.12, 1.1.2.1, 1.1.6. 1, 1.2.3.6, 1.2.5.28, 1.3. 2.16, 1.3.14.6, 1.3.14.10, 1. 4.5.4, 1.4.5.18, 2.1.1.1. 
9 This is Locke’s only use of the phrase “internal sense”.  Hume shows greater fondness for the term, as indicated 
above, and he also speaks several times of “internal impressions” ( T 1.2.3.2-3, 1.3.14.12-25,  1.4.2.20, 2.3.1.2; E 7.9). 
10 Compare M App  1.4 where Hume likewise talks of “sentiment” as a faculty, in order to facilitate a contrast with the 
understanding. 
11 As we shall see again in §4.1, Hume’s treatment of the passions as impressions is extremely problematic, embracing  
relatively pure feelings or emotions such as hunger (e.g. T 2.1.5.7) as well as manifestly intentional states such as 
desire (e.g. T 2.2.6.4-6).  For a useful recent discussion, see Alanen (2006). 
 6 contemporaries and referred to repeatedly throughout the Treatise  and Enquiry .  It has an intimate 
relationship with the passions, a nd Hume often brackets them t ogether as “the will and passions” 
(T 1.3.10.3-5, 2.3.7.3-4, 2.3.7.8, 3.2.7.2).  Part 3 of Treatise  Book 2 is entitled “Of the Will and Direct 
Passions”, with Hume explaining in its second pa ragraph that “tho’, properly speaking, [the WILL ] be 
not comprehended among the passions, yet as the full understanding of its nature  and properties, is 
necessary to the explanation of them, we shall here make it the subject of our enquiry.” ( T 2.3.1.2).  
He immediately goes on to state that “by the will, I mean nothing but the internal impression we feel 
and are conscious of, when we knowingly give rise to any new motion of our body, or new perception 
of our mind” .  This equation of the will with an inte rnal impression, no doubt motivated by his Copy 
Principle, seems to be a slip, as it leaves no obvious  mark on his treatment of the will elsewhere.  A 
more charitable reading would be that Hume intends “the will” to refer to our faculty of knowingly – 
and “willingly” – giving rise to actions (of the mind and body), a faculty of which we become aware, 
and whose idea we thus acquire, through a corres ponding internal impression.  Such willing or 
volition , he thinks, inevitably involves a passion, as is made clear in a famous passage: 
Since reason alone can never produce any action, or give rise to volition, I infer, that the same faculty is 
as incapable of preventing volition, or of disputing the preference with any passion or emotion.  …  ’Tis  impossible reason cou’d have the latter effect of pr eventing volition, but by giving an impulse in a 
contrary direction to our passion; and that impulse, had it operated alone, wou’d have been able to 
produce volition.  Nothing can oppose or retard the impulse of passion, but a contrary impulse …  Thus it appears, that the principle, wh ich opposes our passion, cannot be the same with reason, and is only 
call’d so in an improper sense.  We speak not strictly  and philosophically when we talk of the combat of 
passion and of reason.  Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions, and can never pretend 
to any other office than to serve and obey them.  …  ( T 2.3.3.4) 
Accordingly Hume maintains that when philosophers  consider pure “reason” to be influencing the 
will, they are misidentifying as “reason” what is in  reality a generalised pa ssion “such as benevolence 
and resentment, the love of life, and kindness to ch ildren; or the general appetite to good, and aversion 
to evil, consider’d merely as such” ( T 2.3.3.8).  Such a passion is easily “confounded with reason” 
because it “operates with the same calmness and tranquillit y”, but this is certainly a mistake: influence 
on the will is a sure sign that a passion – rather than pure reason – is in play. 
2.1  The “intellectual faculties” in the Treatise 
All of the faculties examined so far – imagination,  memory, senses (both external and internal), and 
will – seem to be relatively straightforward to id entify and to distinguish from each other, though 
Hume shows particular interest in the narrowest of these distinctions, between the imagination and 
memory, and he devotes most of Treatise  1.3.5 to its clarification.12  But things initially become more 
blurred when we try to pin down Hume’s referen ces to our more “intellectual faculties”, a phrase 
which he himself uses twice in the Treatise  (and more frequently in the Enquiries ).13  The principal 
                                                      
12 This account is also anticipated at T 1.1.3.1. 
13 In the Treatise  the phrase occurs at T 1.3.12.20 and 2.3.8.13, and in later works at E 5.5 n. 8, 9.6, M 1.9, M App  1.11, 
1.13, 1.18, 3.9, and Essays  240 (“Of the Standard of Taste”).  7 candidates here are “the judgment” ( T 1.3.9.16, 1.4.1.6), “the understanding” (e.g. T 1.4.2.14), and of 
course “reason” (e.g. T 3.3.4.5), though he also sometimes see ms to refer to such “faculties” as the 
revival of ideas upon use of a general term ( T 1.1.7.8, 1.1.7.15), and – beyond the Treatise  – the 
compounding of ideas ( A 20).  What, exactly, are the relationships here? 
 Further clarification can be sought fro m those passages where Hume explicitly distinguishes  
between the intellectual and other “faculties”, for example our tastes and sentiments :14 
The sole end of logic is to explai n the principles and operations of our reasoning faculty , and the nature 
of our ideas; morals and criticism regard our tastes and sentiments .  (T Intro.5, my emphasis) 
Here the intellectual faculties are distinguished from memory : 
That faculty … the memory . … why the faculty of recalling past ideas with truth and clearness, should 
not have as much merit in it as the faculty of placing our present ideas in such an order as to form true 
propositions and opinions .  The reason ... must be, that the memory  is exerted without any … pleasure 
or pain, and in all its middling degrees serves almo st equally well ...  But the least variations in the 
judgment  are sensibly felt in their consequences; while at the same time that faculty is never exerted in 
any eminent degree, without an extraordinary delight and satisfaction.  The sympathy with this utility 
and pleasure bestows a merit on the understanding ; and the absence of it makes us consider the memory  
as a faculty very indifferent to blame or praise.  ( T 3.3.4.13, my emphasis) 
Here the judgment  is distinguished from the imagination : 
It may therefore be concluded, that our judgment  and imagination  can never be contrary, and that 
custom cannot operate on th e latter faculty after such a manner, as to render it opposite to the former. 
This difficulty we can remove after no other manner than by supposing the influence of general rules. 
…  Since we have instances where general rules operate on the imagination , even contrary to the 
judgment , …  ( T 1.3.13.11-13, my emphasis) 
And here, finally, reason  is distinguished from passion  and the will : 
Since reason  alone can never produce any action, or give rise to volition, I infer, that the same faculty is 
as incapable of preventing volition, or of disputin g the preference with any passion or emotion. …  
Nothing can oppose or retard the impulse of passion , but a contrary impulse; and if this contrary 
impulse ever arises from reason , that latter faculty must have an original influence on the will  …  
(T 2.3.3.4) 
Note particularly Hume’s fluid interchange in the second passage between “the faculty of placing our 
present ideas in such an order as to form true propositions and opinions”, “the judgment”, and “the 
understanding”, apparently for the sake of elegant variation.  This plainly suggests that he is 
indifferent between all these various ways of referring to  what he takes to be one and the same faculty.  
And this suggestion is corroborated by the st riking absence of any passages at all drawing a contrast  
between his terms for the intellectual faculties: he never  opposes “reason” to “the understanding”, or 
either of these to “the judgment”. 
 Similar evidence – but even stronger – can be found in numerous other Treatise  passages 
which exhibit the same sort of free interchange between the terms “reason” and “the 
                                                      
14 For the remainder of this paragraph, I continue to restrict  attention to passages which include the word “faculty” or 
“faculties” (see note 4 above).  Without this restriction, th ere would be many more such passages to choose from. 
 8 understanding”.15  Here, for the sake of brevity, I shall select only a few of these passages, and quote 
them without comment (in every case, the emphasis is mine rather than Hume’s):16 
 … the next question is, Whether experience produces the idea by means of the understanding  or of 
the imagination; whether we are determin’d by reason  to make the transition, or by a certain association 
and relation of perceptions.  ( T 1.3.6.4) 
 … the mind … is not determin’d by reason , but by certain principles, which associate together the 
ideas of these objects,  and unite them in the imagination .  Had ideas no more union in the fancy  than 
objects seem to have to the understanding , …  ( T 1.3.6.12) 
 Our reason  must be consider’d as a kind of cause, of which truth is the natural effect; but such-a-
one as by the irruption of other causes … may frequently be prevented.  … our experience of the 
veracity or deceitfulness of our understanding  … (T 1.4.1.1) 
 There are no principles either of the understanding  or fancy , which lead us directly to embrace this 
opinion …  ‘The … hypothesis has no primary recommendation either to reason  or the imagination  …’ 
(T 1.4.2.46) 
 This sceptical doubt, both with respect to reason and the senses  …  ’Tis impossible upon any 
system to defend either our understanding or senses  …  ( T 1.4.2.57) 
 … we subvert entirely the human understanding .  We have, therefore, no choice left but betwixt a 
false reason  and none at all.  ( T 1.4.7.7) 
All of these appear to exemplify a merely st ylistic variation between “reason” and “the 
understanding”, exactly paralleling in some cases a similar variation between “the fancy” and “the 
imagination”.  As if to remove any doubt as to wh ether this terminological variety might have some 
deeper philosophical significance, Hume expands a footnote taken from T 2.2.7.6 to form another at 
T 1.3.9.19 (cf. note 55 in §6.1 below), adding thr ee sentences and making a number of manifestly 
stylistic changes, including the modification of: 
… when it [the imagination] is oppos’d to the understanding, I understand the same faculty, excluding 
only our demonstrative and probable reasonings. 
to: 
… when I oppose it [the imagination] to reason , I mean the same faculty, excluding only our 
demonstrative and probable reasonings. 
Presumably this change was prompted in part by the clumsiness of “… the understanding, I 
understand …”.  But whatever lies behind it, there is  clear evidence here that “reason” and “the 
understanding” are, for Hume, totally equivalent. 
 In addition to this wealth of indirect textual ev idence, we also have a very explicit statement in 
                                                      
15 Hume also occasionally alternates between “reason” and “the judgment”, but because the latter term is often used to 
refer to specific judgements rather than a faculty, some relevant texts are subtly ambiguous.  Passages apparently alternating between “reason” and “judgment” in the faculty sense include T 1.3.15.11, 1.4.1.6,  2.1.11.2, possibly 
3.3.1.18 and App 1, while the Dissertation on the Passions  5.1 talks of “… reason, in a strict sense, as meaning the 
judgment of truth and falsehood …” 
16 For other relevant passages from the Treatise , see for example T 1.3.13.12, 1.4.1.12, 1.4.2. 14, 2.3.3.2-6, 3.1.1.16-18, 
and 3.1.1.26.  For passages from the Enquiry , see E 4.0-1, 5.5, 5.22, 7.28 and 9.0- 1.  As the two quotations from 
T 1.3.6.4 and 1.3.6.12 illustrate, Hume interchanges between “reason” and “the understanding” within his famous 
argument concerning induction just as he does elsewhere.  For other references to “the understanding” within the 
treatment of induction in the Enquiry , see especially E 4.15, 5.2 and 5.8.   9 a long footnote added to the Treatise , where Hume insists on this integration of the intellectual faculty, 
and criticises traditional logicians for subdividing its operations: 
We may here take occasion to observe a very remarkab le error, which being freq uently inculcated in the 
schools, has become a kind of  establish’d maxim, and is universally receiv’d by all logicians.  This error 
consists in the vulgar division of the acts of the understanding, into conception , judgment  and 
reasoning , and in the definitions we give of them.  Conception is defin’d to be the simple survey of one 
or more ideas: Judgment to be the separating or uniting of different ideas: Reasoning to be the 
separating or uniting of different ideas by the interposition of others, which show the relation they bear to each other.  But these distinctions  and definitions are faulty …”  ( T 1.3.7.5 n. 20) 
Hume goes on to explain that a judgement or propos ition (e.g. that God exists) can involve just a 
single idea, and that reasoning can involve only two (without any “medium” to connect them), as for 
example when “we infer a cause immediately from its e ffect”.  Though standardly classified as distinct 
“acts of the understanding”, conception , judgment  and reasoning  actually “all resolve themselves into 
the first, and are nothing but particular ways of conceiving our objects”.  He continues: 
Whether we consider a single object, or several; whether we dwell on these objects, or run from them to 
others; and in whatever form or order we survey  them, the act of the mind exceeds not a simple 
conception; and the only remarkable difference, which occurs on this occasion, is, when we join belief 
to the conception, and are perswaded of the truth of what we conceive. 
Hume’s reduction of judgement and reasoning to c onception is clearly motivated by his theory of 
causal inference, in which a transfer of viv acity “from the impression to the idea”, through the 
operation of custom, serves to change conception into belief.17 
2.2  The Treatise taxonomy of the faculties 
Summing up so far, our survey of Hume’s faculty references in the Treatise  – omitting those passages 
in which he refers very generally to “all the faculties of the soul” ( T 3.2.5.2) etc. – points strongly to a 
taxonomy that recognises just five main divisions within the faculties: 
                                                      
17 It also draws on his denial of any separate idea of existence, which he takes to be implied by his Copy Principle 
(T 1.2.6.2-5) and to undermine the Ontological Argument.  Hence his choice of the example “God is” ( T 1.3.7.5 n. 20). the intellectual faculty 
(“the understanding”, 
“reason”, or “judgment”) the imagination 
(“the fancy”) memory the senses the will 
smell hearing taste sight touch reflection 
(“internal 
sense” ) external 
senses passions 
 10 In this diagram, a solid connecting line indicates a constituent relationship (e.g. sight is a sub-faculty 
of the external senses).  The passions are shown in  a dotted box, indicating their dubious status as a 
faculty, while the two arrows highlight their inte rmediate position between the faculty of reflection 
(from which, as internal impressions, they arise) and the will (which it is their nature to influence). 
 We have already noted the absence  of any passages drawing a contrast between the various 
terms that Hume uses for the “intellectual facu lties”, which strongly corroborates the hypothesis that 
he draws no fundamental divide between them.  It is likewise significant that – apart from the obvious 
distinction between the various senses – there do not  seem to be any passages at all in which Hume 
implies a faculty separation within any of the main categories in the fivefold taxonomy above, whereas 
he explicitly distinguishes  at least once between almost every pair of them.  To give just one example 
of each, the imagination is spoken of in  terms implying separation from reason ( T 1.4.2.14), the 
memory ( T 1.3.5.3), the senses ( T 1.2.4.30), and the passions ( T 2.2.2.16); reason is likewise 
distinguished from the memory ( T 3.3.4.13), the senses ( T 1.4.2.2-3), and the will ( T 2.3.3.4); while 
memory is distinguished from the senses ( T 1.3.5.2-3).  (No explicit dis tinction is urged between will 
and memory, or will and the senses, presumably because the differences here are quite obvious.) 
 We shall see in §4.3 below that most of th is taxonomy can be understood as arising quite 
naturally from Hume’s general ph ilosophy of mind.  Before procee ding with this, however, it will be 
helpful to deal with a contrary claim that has b een prominently made by Don Garrett and David Owen, 
who insist on a fundamental division within Hume’s “intellectual faculties” and thus contradict the 
conclusion reached above, that Hume’s terms “rea son” and “the understa nding” are equivalent. 
3.  Reason and the understanding 
My claim of equivalence between Humean “re ason” and “the understandi ng” – though in a sense 
merely terminological – is potentially very signifi cant for the interpretation of Hume on induction.  
For as we saw briefly in §1, scholars such as Garrett and Owen interpret his famous denial that 
induction is founded on “reason” as ruling out only a foundation in inference  or ratiocination .  To 
make this claim textually plausible, they are thus forced to take “reason” as referring quite narrowly to 
a particular sub-faculty of the mind whose special ro le is ratiocination, rather than to the more 
comprehensive cognitive faculty known as “the unde rstanding”.  The latter – as witnessed by the 
scope of Locke’s appropriately named Essay Concerning Human Understanding  – was generally 
taken to encompass not only inference, but also a wide variety of other cognitive operations such as 
the grasping of ideas, the apprehension of percep tions conveyed through the senses, and the perception 
and judgement of intuitive and pr obable connexions.  A denial that induction is founded on any 
operation of this general cognitive faculty would therefore be a far more significant result (and 
potentially more sceptical) than a mere denial that induction is founded on ratioc ination in particular.  
In order for Hume’s negative result concerning in duction to be as non-sceptical as Garrett and Owen 
maintain, therefore, “reason” must apparently be  merely a sub-faculty of “the understanding”.  11  The historical evidence that they provide for thei r interpretation, however,  is rather scanty, and 
seems to derive entirely from Locke.  Thus Garrett (1997, pp. 26-7): 
“Reason,” according to Locke, is th e faculty of the “discovering an d finding out of Proofs,” “laying 
them in a clear and fit Order,” “perceiving thei r Connexion,” and “making a right conclusion” ( Essay  
IV.xvii.3).  Reason is thus a faculty of finding, presenting, appreciating, and being moved to belief by arguments.  …  Similarly for Hume, reason is the faculty of reasoning: of making inferences, or 
providing, appreciating, and being moved by arguments. 
And again (1997, p. 85): 
Hume has not explained his use of the term “reason” up to this point [because] he has been following 
the common Lockean usage of that term … That usage, as Hume here notes [ T 1.3.11.2, 124], treats the 
products of “reason” as consisting in both knowledge and probability.  This is because, for Locke, 
“reason” is simply the inferential or argumenta tive faculty of the mind.  Thus Locke states 
unequivocally “ Reason , therefore … I take to be the discovery of the Certainty or Probability of … 
Propositions or Truths …” ( Essay  IV.xviii.2; see also Essay  IV.xvii.2). 
Garrett’s book does not directly address the relations hip between “reason” and “the understanding”, 
but in a 1998 Hume Studies  exchange he took up the topic in response to Millican’s citation (1998, 
p. 157 n. 7) of passages such as those fro m §2.1 above as an objection to his account: 
As I read Hume, “the understanding” signifies all of our cognitive processes – including intuition – and 
is therefore rather broader than the infe rential “reasoning”.  (Garrett 1998, p. 185) 
A note here (p. 194 n. 10) continues: 
Millican’s citations do not persuade me that “reas on” and “understanding” are synonyms; since reason 
is the main element of the understa nding, whatever can be ascribed to reason can also be ascribed to the 
understanding.18  Hume can appropriately entitle Book I of the Treatise  “Of the understanding,” but it 
would not be nearly as appropriate to entitle it “O f Reason.”  Similarly, Locke’s entire book is called An 
Essay concerning Human Understanding ; one of its chapters is “Of Reason.”  
Owen’s book is more explicit than Garrett’s on the relationship between “reason” and “the 
understanding”, and is very definite on how these should “strictly” be interpreted, despite Hume’s 
lapses (1999, p. 142, n. 40): 
Hume sometimes uses “understanding” and “reason” as synonyms, though strictly speaking the 
understanding is a more inclusive faculty than reason.  His loose use of the traditional faculty 
terminology is in part due to his theory that all the traditional activities of the understanding reduce to 
conception:  [here Owen quotes from T 1.3.7.5 n. 20, cf. §2.1 above] 
Perhaps precisely because Owen takes this terminology to be “traditional”, he does not explicitly cite 
any references to back up his claims about how it was used.  However it is clear from his overall 
discussion (e.g. pp. 63-5, 74, 78, 85-6, 91) that, like Garrett, he takes Hume’s use of the terminology to be directly derived from that of Locke. 
                                                     
 
18 This point cuts both ways, however: if ratiocination is the dominant operation of reason  (i.e. the understanding ), 
then this can equally explain away why much of what Hume says about “reason” can easily be interpreted in Garrett’s way as concerning ratiocination in particular (even if in fact Hume is referring, throughout, to the understanding).  
Suppose that in Treatise  1.3.6 Hume’s concern is to show that the understanding  – the cognitive faculty – is not 
responsible for inductive inference.  Then it is only to be expected that his main effort will go into proving that rational argument  cannot ground such inference, and this makes it easy to misread his conclusion that induction “is not 
determin’d by reason” as saying that induction cannot be founded on ratiocination  (when his intended point concerns 
reason  – the cognitive faculty).  Cf. note 23 below. 
 12 3.1  “Reason” and “the understanding” in Locke 
Locke does indeed sometimes  appear to use the faculty term “reason” in the way that Garrett and 
Owen suggest.19  To the two passages quoted by Garrett one might add: 
The greatest part of our Knowledge depends upon Deductions and intermediate Ideas :  And in those 
Cases [where we achieve only probability rather than knowledge] we have need to find out, examine, 
and compare the grounds of  their Probability.  In both these Cases, the Faculty which finds out the 
Means, and rightly applies them to discover Certainty in the one, and Probability in the other, is that which we call Reason.  ( Essay  IV xvii 2) 
In the Discovery of, and Assent to these Truths [v iz. those known intuitively], there is no Use of the 
discursive Faculty, no need of Reasoning , but they are known by a superior, and higher Degree of 
Evidence.  ( Essay  IV xvii 14) 
When the Agreement of any two Ideas  appears to our Minds, whether i mmediately, or by the Assistance 
of Reason, …  ( Essay  IV xx 16) 
However Locke also seems to use the term in a broa der way that potentially covers all of the cognitive 
functions that enable us to discover truth, and so in particular embraces intuition as well as 
ratiocination: 
THE Word Reason  … stands for a Faculty in Man, That Faculty, whereby Man is supposed to be 
distinguished from Beasts, and wherein it is evident he much surpasses them.  ( Essay  IV xvii 1) 
Reason  is natural Revelation , whereby the eternal Father of Light, and Fountain of all Knowledge 
communicates to Mankind that portion of Truth, which he has laid within the reach of their natural Faculties:  Revelation  is natural Reason  enlarged by a new set of Discoveries …  ( Essay  IV xix 4) 
Nothing that is contrary to, and inconsistent with the clear and self-evident Dictates of Reason, has a 
Right to be urged, or assented to, as a Matter of Faith  …  ( Essay  IV xviii 10) 
But if they know it to be a Truth, they must know it to be so either by its own self-evidence to natural 
Reason; or by the rational Proofs that make it out to be so.  ( Essay  IV xix 11) 
The “clear and self-evident Dictates of Reason” can only refer to truths known by intuition rather than 
ratiocination.  This is made absolutely clear in the last quotation above, when Locke explicitly 
distinguishes “self-evidence to natural Reason” from knowledge by means of “rational Proofs”. 
 If one of these two interpretations of “reason” h as to be chosen as Locke’s “official” position, 
then I would certainly opt for the broader view, part ly because this can at least avoid straightforward 
inconsistency with the passages quoted above.  For on the one hand it is entirely consistent to refer to 
“reason” as our reasoning or discursive faculty, without thereby requiring that reasoning  (in the sense 
of stepwise ratiocination ) should be its only function.  But on the other hand, limiting reason to 
ratiocination seems flatly inconsistent with the l ast two quotations above, which clearly imply that 
“natural Reason” is responsible for the recognition of  self-evident, intuitive trut hs.  Further evidence in 
the same direction can be gleaned from an early draft of the Essay , which seems even to deny that 
demonstration – accepted by all as a paradigm opera tion of reason – essentially involves ratiocination: 
                                                      
19 Before announcing his intention to focus on the faculty term, Locke begins his chapter “Of Reason” by pointing out 
that “T HE Word Reason  in the English  Language has different Significations : sometimes it is taken for true, and clear 
Principles: Sometimes for clear, and fair deductions fro m those Principles: and sometimes for the Cause, and 
particularly the final Cause.”  ( Essay  IV xvii 1).  13 “we … looke for noe greater certainty  then what our eyes can afford us, the whole evidence of this 
assureance being noe more then what the word Demonstration  doth naturaly import; which is to shew 
any thing as it is & make it be perceived soe that in truth what we come to know this way is not by 
proofe but intuition, all the proofe that is used in this way of knowledg being noe thing else but shewing men how they shall see right … without useing arguments  to perswade them that they are soe”  (Locke 
1671, p. 153) 
This strongly suggests that if any operation has a claim to being essential to Lockean reason it is 
perception  rather than ratiocination, something made  equally clear by Locke’s main account of 
reasoning in the Essay : 
Inference  … consists in nothing but the Perceptio n of the connexion there is between the Ideas , in each 
step of the deduction, wh ereby the Mind comes to see, either th e certain Agreement of Disagreement of 
any two Ideas , as in Demonstration, in which it arrives at Knowledge; or their probable connexion, on 
which it gives or with-holds its Assent, as in Opinion.  … For as Reason perceives the necessary, and 
indubitable connexion of all the Ideas  or Proofs one to another, in each  step of any Demonstration that 
produces Knowledge; so it likewise percei ves the probable connexion of all the Ideas  or Proofs one to 
another, in every step of a Discourse, to which it will think Assent due.  … [Where] the Mind does not 
perceive this probable connexion; where it does not discern, whether there be any such connexion, or 
no, there Men’s Opinions are not the product of Judgment, or the Consequence of Reason; but the effects of Chance and Hazard”  ( Essay  IV xvii 2).
20 
However one might reasonably doubt whether there is any single “official” Lockean position on the 
faculty of “reason”, because as we shall see in §5.1 be low, Locke’s attitude to the language of faculties 
is sceptical, even anti-realist.  He is most explicit about this at Essay  II xxi 17-20, where he 
forthrightly ridicules such language, criticises it as  a source of philosophical error, and declares 
himself inclined to forego it completely were it not that faculty words are so much in fashion that “It 
looks like too much affectation wholly to lay them  by”.  Accordingly he seems to care little about 
where faculty boundaries are drawn or how they are named: 
“the understanding, or reason, which-ever your lord ship pleases to call it, makes or forms, out of the 
simple ones that come in by sensation and reflection, all the other ideas …”  (1697, pp. 70-1). 
In this context, it can hardly be expected that Locke’s terminology will be thoroughly consistent, or 
that any strong interpretative conclusions can  legitimately be drawn from its details. 
3.2  “Reason” and “the understanding” in Hume’s contemporaries 
We have seen that Locke’s usage provides little if any support for the claim of Garre tt and Owen that 
he standardly uses the term “reason” to  refer to the specific sub-faculty of ratiocination  (rather than 
“the understanding” – our ove rall cognitive faculty).  But given their claim that this interpretation was 
“common” and “traditional” in Hume’s day, we might expect to find confirmi ng evidence in the works 
of Hume’s contemporaries.  Obviously it is not possi ble here to survey a very wide range of authors 
and texts, so for the sake of convenience, but also  (as before) to minimise any suspicion of biased 
selection, I shall confine myself to works included in Selby-Bigge’s collection British Moralists  
                                                      
20 It is striking how Locke, while innovatively (and in contrast with Descartes) acknowledging the vital importance of 
probability, nevertheless attempts to force it into a perceptu al model that has evidently been tailored to fit the more 
familiar case of demonstrati on.  He thus reduces all judgement  to perception  of evidential connexions, which (as noted 
by Millican 2002, pp. 115-16) makes his treatment of misjudgement  in Essay  IV xx seriously problematic. 
 14 (1897), which is perhaps the most widely available source for other writers of the period.  Since, 
moreover, Selby-Bigge characteristically added an an alytical index to his collection, sceptical readers 
can easily check for themselves if they doubt that my selection is representative. 
 My first quotation is from Book II Part ii of Shaftesbury’s An Inquiry concerning Virtue  
(1699/1732),21 at §48 in the Selby-Bigge collection: 
It will be acknowledg’d that a Creature, such as Ma n, who from several degrees of Reflection has risen 
to that Capacity which we call Reason and Understanding; must in the very use of this his reasoning Faculty, be forc’d to receive Reflec tions back into his Mind of what pa sses in itself, as well as in the 
Affections, or Will … 
Note here the clear statement that “Reason” and “Understanding” are alternative names for the very 
same capacity.  An equivalence between the two is also implicit in the following quotation from 
Section I of Hutcheson’s Illustrations upon the Moral Sense  (1728/1742), at §450 in the Selby-Bigge 
collection: 
Writers on these Subjects should remember the common Divisions of the Faculties of the Soul.  That 
there is 1. Reason  presenting the natures and relations of  things, antecedently to any Act of Will or 
Desire:  2. The Will, or Appetitus Rationalis , or the disposition of Soul to pursue what is presented as 
good, and to shun Evil.  …  Both these Po wers are by the Antients included under the Λόγος  or λογικ òν 
μέρος  .  Below these they place two other powers dependent on the Body, the Sensus , and the Appetitus 
Sensitivus , in which they place the particular Passions: the former answers to the Understanding , and 
the latter to the Will.  But the Will is forgot of late, and some ascribe to the Intellect , not only 
Contemplation  or Knowledge, but Choice , Desire , Prosecuting , Loving . 
In speaking of “the Understanding”, Hutcheson is cl early referring back to the faculty which he has 
previously called “Reason” – indeed the fact that  he is so unconcerned about using these two names 
for the same faculty without even the slightest comment strongly suggests that an identification 
between them was thoroughly commonplace.  For evid ence that this remained the case over the period 
when Hume was writing, we can turn to Chapter I Section ii of Price’s A Review of the Principal 
Questions in Morals  (1758/1787), at §§590-2 in the Selby-Bigge collection: 
The power, I assert, that understands;  or the faculty within us that dis cerns truth, and that compares all 
the objects of thought, and judges of them, is a spring of new ideas. 
As, perhaps, this has not been enough attended to, and as the question to be discussed, is; whether our 
moral ideas are derived from the understanding or from a sense; it will be necessary to state distinctly 
the different natures and provinces of sense and reason. 
… Sense presents particular forms to the mind; but cann ot rise to any general ideas.  It is the intellect 
that examines and compares  the presented forms, that rises above individuals to universal and abstract 
ideas. …  Sense sees only the outside of things, reas on acquaints itself with their natures. …  Feeling 
pain, for example, is the effect of sense; but the understanding is employed when pain itself is made an 
object of the mind’s reflexion … 
Like Hutcheson, Price seems perfectly content to  refer to one and the same faculty not only as 
“reason” and “the understanding”, but also as “the inte llect”.  The supposed subtle distinction between 
the rational faculties appealed to by Ga rrett and Owen is quite invisible here. 
                                                      
21 The dates are those of the first edition and of the edition us ed by Selby-Bigge, whose text I follow except in respect 
of the Hutcheson passage, which is taken from the 1742 thir d edition in which the relevant paragraph first appeared.  15  The same sources can also be used to strengthe n the suggestion made earlier, that in so far as 
“reason” was understood by Locke and his successor s to have any essential operation, this was 
perception  rather than ratiocination .22  Hutcheson, as we have seen, characterises reason as 
“presenting the natures and relations of things”.  And here again is Price (from Selby-Bigge §593): 
In a word, it appears that sense and understanding are faculties of the soul totally different: … The one 
not discerning, but suffering; the other not suffering, but discerning; and signifying the soul’s Power of 
surveying and examining all things, in order to judge of them; which Power, perhaps, can hardly be 
better defined, than by calling it, in Plato’s language, the power in the soul to which belongs … the apprehension of Truth. 
As a final example, let us move away from the Selby-Bigge Moralists  collection to what was arguably 
the most significant contemporary work in philosophical  theology, and of particular interest to Hume, 
published only shortly before he returned  from France with the manuscript of the Treatise .  Both the 
identification of “reason” with “the understanding”,  and the perceptual nature of that faculty, are 
implicit in the following passage from Butler’s Analogy of Religion  (1736), Part I Chapter vi §19: 
… as speculative reason may be neglected, prej udiced, and deceived, so also may our moral 
understanding be impaired and perverted …  This indeed proves nothing against the reality of our 
speculative or practical faculties of perception … 
So not only was the perceptual conception of reas on that we saw in Locke still flourishing within 
British thought, but also, it was by no means confined  to “rationalists” such as Price.  Moreover this 
conception, as we shall see in §3.4, was clo sely linked with these philosophers’ view of reason  as our 
comprehensive cognitive faculty, that is, the understanding  by another name. 
3.3  “Reason” and “reasoning” 
The recently fashionable trend of interpreting Humean reason  as a faculty devoted to ratiocination  in 
particular, rather than rational activity in general, is not apparently based on either Locke’s usage or 
that of Hume’s contemporaries.  Instead, it seems to be founded larg ely on Hume’s own statements of 
the conclusion of his famous argument.  Thus Garr ett (1997, p. 91) persuasively begins his seminal 
presentation with a sequence of qu otations giving formulations  of that conclusion from the Treatise , 
Abstract , and Enquiry , including phrases such as these (silently corrected here): 
“’tis impossible for us to satisfy ourselves by our reason.  …  We suppose, but are never able to prove 
…”  (T 1.3.6.11) 
“… there is no argument, which determines me …  ’Tis not, therefore, reason …”  (A 15-16) 
“… our conclusions from that experience are not founded on reasoning, or any process of the 
understanding”  (E 4.15) 
“What logic, what process of argument secures you against this supposition?”  (E 4.21) 
“… it is not reasoning which engages us to suppose the past resembling the future …  This is the 
proposition which I intended to enforce in the present section.”  (E 4.23) 
                                                      
22 The terminological equivalence between “reason” and “the understanding” also strongly corroborates this claim, 
since understanding is more a matter of intellectual per ception or grasping of ideas than it is of inference. 
 16 These do indeed give the impression of implicitly identifying reason’s activities as proof , argument , 
and reasoning .  Accordingly Noonan (1999, p. 119-21), re ferring to Garrett, approvingly dubs this the 
“literalist” interpretation, for ta king these quotations quite literally. 
 In interpreting these passages, Garrett, Owen,  and Noonan all assume – as most modern 
readers probably would – that when Hume talks of proof , argument , and reasoning , he intends to refer 
quite specifically to stepwise  forms of inference.  In that case, these quotations would indeed provide 
some prima facie evidence for thei r favoured interpretation of the famous argument, but even so this 
would not seriously undermine the case already made against their reading of Humean “reason”.  For 
suppose that Hume, as I claim, followed his contempor aries in using “reason” to refer to our general 
intellectual faculty – embracing intuition and co ntemplation of perceptions as well as stepwise 
inference – but that he considered it entirely obvious  that of these intellectual operations, only stepwise 
inference looked even remotely plausible as a source of rational support for induction.  In such a 
situation, he would naturally devote his main energi es to refuting that possibility, after which it would 
again be natural to express his conclusion in a wa y that focused on the absence of such a foundation in 
stepwise inference, even if his ultimate point were more general .  So we might well expect to find him 
stating on some occasions that there is no stepwise inference to justify induction, and on other 
occasions that there is no rational ground  whatever.  That – apparently – is just what we do find.23 
 But in fact the position of Garrett, Owen and Noonan is even weaker than this suggests, 
because the quotations above do virtually nothing to s upport their interpretation.  We might today read 
words like “argument”, “proof” and “reasoning” as cl early implying inference through intermediate 
steps, but there was no such implicati on in the eighteenth century.  Johnson’s Dictionary  (1756-99) 
gives as the first sense of the word “argument”: 
 argument  “A reason alleged for or against any thing”,24 
and he implicitly confirms that this is its primary sense in specifying as one of the non-discursive  
senses of “reason”: 
 reason   “Argument; ground of persuasion; motive”. 
Likewise the first sense of “proof” is given in 1756 as:  proof   “Evidence; testimony; convincing token”, 
supplemented in later editions by the clauses:  “convincing argument; means of conviction”.  
Meanwhile all we learn about the word “reasoning”  – apart from the note that it is etymologically 
derived from “reason” – is a single word definition: 
                                                     
 
23 This line of thought gives the simplest explanation – with no need to suppose any change of mind – of why Hume at 
Treatise  1.3.6.4-6 considers only demonstrative and probable argument as rational means of proving the Uniformity 
Principle (cf. §5.3 below), while in the Enquiry  he appears to give “reason” a broader interpretation. 
24 That this does not imply a discursive  reason is confirmed by Johnson’s first example, from Dryden: “We sometimes 
see, on our theatres, vice rewarded, at least unpunished; yet it ought not to be an argument  against the art.”  17  reasoning   “Argument”. 
This would seem to imply that intuition , as an activity of reason which supplies convincing grounds, 
must count as reasoning .  And Johnson’s definition of the rele vant sense of “intuition” and “intuitive” 
does nothing to alter this impression (my emphasis): 
  intuition  “Knowledge not obtained by deduction  of reason”; 
  intuitive  “Having the power of discovering truth immediately without ratiocination ”. 
Note that these clauses do not say that intuition excludes reasoning  (as one might expect them to do, if 
Garrett et al.  were correct); they instead choose the less familiar words deduction  and ratiocination .  
This hints at a distinction between these technical terms for stepwise inference on the one hand, and argument , proof , and reasoning  on the other, with the latter three terms carrying no stepwise 
implication.  Such a distinction is c onfirmed by the corresponding definitions,
25 and also corroborated 
by Hume’s own usage: he refers to “deductions” in contexts where stepwise argument is clearly 
intended (e.g. T 1.3.14.2, E 5.22, M 1.4), and he speaks once of “intuitive arguments” ( T 1.3.14.35) 
and repeatedly of “intuitive proof” ( T 2.3.2.2, E 8.2.2 n. 18, HL i 187).  He also refers to a supposed 
intuitive “inference” at E 4.17, while E 4.1 clearly includes intuition as an “operation of thought”.26 
 To sum up, everything that we have seen so far confirms that reason , for Hume’s 
contemporaries, is an alternative name for the understanding , our comprehensive cognitive faculty.  It 
now also appears that the cognate term reasoning , though today usually confined to stepwise 
ratiocination, had no such limitation at the time, a nd hence could perfectly well serve (as its etymology 
indeed suggests) as a generic term for the activities of that faculty. 
3.4  Reason as the supreme cognitive faculty 
To investigate more deeply the presumed role and natu re of reason, let us now turn back to Hutcheson, 
who is of particular interest as a highly respected  correspondent of Hume’s around the period of the 
Treatise , and is also, of all the author s considered in §3.2 above, the most explicit in spelling out the 
“common Divisions of the Faculties of the Soul” and their presumed structure.  In the passage quoted 
earlier, he hints at this structure, which he discusses at far greater length in his Latin Synopsis of 
Metaphysics  (also published in 1742).  Most fundamentally, he divides the faculties into two broad 
domains, each of which “answers to” a predominant f aculty.  Within the first of these – the domain of 
reason  (or intellect , or the understanding ) – he places the senses , which he takes to include internal 
                                                      
25 “To deduce” is defined in three clauses: “1. To draw in a regular connected series.  2. To form a regular chain of 
consequential propositions.  3. To lay down in regular order.”  “Ratiocination” is defined in just one clause: “The act of reasoning; the act of deducing consequences from premises.” 
26 Also, of course, Hume’s own theory of inductive inference implies that it typically does not proceed in a stepwise 
manner, but essentially reduces to conception  (see T 1.3.7.5 n. 20 in §2.1 above); yet he never hints that terms such as 
“argument”, “inference”, “proof” or “reasoning” are thereby re ndered inappropriate to these transitions of thought.  So 
it is hard to see how he could consiste ntly refuse to apply them – on grounds of immediacy – to “intuitive inference”. 
 18 sense or consciousness , reflexive or subsequent senses , and external senses .  Other faculties treated 
within the province of reason include the imagination , memory , and ratiocination , all of which assist 
reason “in presenting the natures and relations  of things, antecedently to any Act of Will or Desire ”. 
 Hutcheson’s second domain, accordingly, is that of the will , under which fall the operations of 
the mind pertaining to action , such as choice , desires , aversions , and passions .  Thus his division 
between the domains of reason  and the will  is essentially the same as th e modern distinction between 
cognitive  and conative  mental functions, a dichotomy who se fundamental nature is often now 
expressed in terms of a “direction of fit” between world and mind: reason  aims to conform our beliefs 
to the way the world is, while the will  aims to change the world to conform to our desires.  Another 
characterisation is Reid’s (1785, 1788) distinc tion between the mind’s “intellectual” and “active” 
powers, but as Hutcheson himself is keen to stress,  recognition of this fundamental division goes back 
to the ancients and was entirely commonplace in the early modern period, featuring in the writings of 
Descartes (e.g. the fourth Meditation ), Locke (e.g. Essay  II vi 2, II xxi 6)  and countless others. 
 From this perspective, the role of reason   (or intellect , or the understanding ) is standardly 
taken to be oversight  or supervision  of the subordinate cognitive faculties: receiving their reports 
(e.g. the impressions of sense or recollections of  memory) and making judgements accordingly.  This 
is what Hutcheson means when he says that “The senses  report to the understanding ” (1744, p. 112).27  
And it clearly explains why reason’s most essential operation should be taken to be intellectual 
perception  and understanding  – examining the deliverances of  the subordinate faculties and 
appreciating their force – rather than ratiocination .  On this model, even the assessment of non-
demonstrative evidence is reduced to the perception  of evidential connections, a point made fully 
explicit by Locke (cf. note 20 above) but apparent ly presupposed by others.  This reduction may seem 
very implausible to our eyes, but its obvious attraction to the early moderns is as a means of bringing everyday and scientific judgement – “reasonablenes s” – within the realm of reason as traditionally 
conceived: the realm of truth and falsehood where reason’s role can be straightforwardly understood 
as that of perceiving  “the natures and relations of things”.  On this conception, when complex 
reasoning is required to reach an appropriate judge ment, it is not to be understood algorithmically in 
the fashion of Frege or Turing (as involving mental progression th rough a stepwise procedure), but 
rather as a process of rearrangement of ideas to facilitate the appropriate perception .  This paradigm 
accounts for the passage quoted earlier from Draft B  of Locke’s Essay , with its apparently paradoxical 
claim that demonstrative proof ach ieves knowledge “not by proofe but intuition” (1671, p.153).  And 
it is also clearly discernible in Locke’s account of reason in the Essay  itself: 
So that we may in reason consider these four degrees; the first and highest is the discovering and 
finding out of truths; the second, the regular and methodical disposition of them, and laying them in a 
clear and fit order, to make their connexion and for ce be plainly and easily perceived: The third is the 
perceiving their connexion; and the fourth, making a right conclusion.  ( Essay  IV xvii 3) 
                                                      
27 In the original Latin, “Ad Intellectum , referentur Sensus ”.   19 Locke nevertheless treats such rearrangement of ideas as a genuine function of reason .  Hutcheson 
appears to devolve it to a subordinate faculty of ratiocination , thus manifesting even more clearly his 
commitment to a perceptual concepti on of our primary rational faculty. 
 Summing up, here is a very simplified model of the overall faculty structure described by 
Hutcheson,28 and taken by him to be commonly accepted.29 
If reason  plays this supervisory role, receiving and asses sing the deliverances of our various other 
cognitive faculties to make judgements about “the natures and relations of things”, then it can 
appropriately be described in terms such as these: 
Locke: “ Reason  is natural Revelation , whereby [God] communicates to Mankind that portion 
of Truth, which he has laid within the reach of their natural Faculties” 
Hutcheson: “Reason is understood to denote our Power of finding out true Propositions” 
Hartley: “The Understanding  is that Faculty, by which we … pursue Truth, and assent to, or 
dissent from, Propositions.” 
Price:   “reason … [is] the power in the soul to which belongs … the apprehension of Truth.” 
The domain of reason thus encompasses all the faculties involved in our discovery of truth .  On this 
use of the term, at least, Hume generally seems to be happy to follow the established tradition:30 
                                                      
28 For a more detailed diagram of the structure given in Hutcheson’s Synopsis , and a brief comparison with Hume’s 
faculty structure, see the Appendix to this paper.  Note in pa rticular that Hutcheson’s view of the senses is far broader 
than Hume’s, accommodating such things as aesthetic and moral as well as external and internal senses. 
29 That the main faculty divisions recognised by Hutcheson were indeed commonly accepted in England as well as 
Scotland is illustrated by David Hartley’s Observations on Man  (1749): “The Human Mind may also [together with the 
senses] be considered as indued with the Faculties of Memory , Imagination  or Fancy , Understanding , Affection  
[Hume’s and Hutcheson’s “passions”], and Will.  … The Understanding  is that Faculty, by which we contemplate 
mere Sensations and Ideas, pursue Truth, and assent to , or dissent from, Propositions.” (Vol. 1, p. iii). reason 
(or “intellect”, or 
“the understandin g”) the will 
ratiocination imagination memory senses passions the cognitive realm, “presenting the natures and relations of things” the conative, practical realm
rearranges ideas to 
facilitate perception 
of their connexions both imagination and memory 
re-present the ideas derived 
from sensory impressions present 
sensory 
impressions express 
desires and 
aversions perceives and judges the deliverances 
 of the subordinate faculties, to discover 
the “natures and relations of things” decides on action, 
based on reason 
and passions 
 20 1739: “Reason is the discovery of truth or falshood.”  ( T 3.1.1.9) 
1757-77: “reason, in a strict sense, as meaning the judgment of truth and falsehood …”  ( DOP  5.1) 
But of course this whole perspective, b ased on a pervasive metaphor of intellectual perception  by a 
supreme overseer of the cognitive faculties, sits rather uneasily with Hume’s own revolutionary 
account of how reason operates .  For this ultimately reveals it to be – at least in some sense – a sub-
faculty of the imagination, determined by brute ins tinctive mechanisms and the vivacity of ideas rather 
than by any quasi-angelic insight or “apprehension of  Truth”.  We shall return to this tension in 
Hume’s position later, after we have briefly review ed his taxonomy of the faculties, the logic behind 
it, and those respects in which it conforms quite closely to the traditional picture sketched above. 
4.  Reviewing Hume’s taxonomy of the faculties 
So far, our discussion has been largely dominated by the systematic collection of textual evidence, a 
strategy intended to minimise any risk of biased sel ection.  In §§2-2.1 we examined Hume’s use of 
explicit faculty language in the Treatise , enabling identification of the principal faculties that he 
recognises and, in particular, indicating strongly that he takes “reason” and “t he understanding” to be 
one and the same.  After sketching the resulting taxonom y in §2.2, we proceeded in §3 to take note of 
a major objection urged by Garrett and Owen, that Humean “reason” should be seen as a mere sub-
faculty of “the understanding”, responsible only for ra tiocination.  Their interpretation purports to be 
based on contemporary and traditional usage, so we set out to examine the position of Locke’s Essay  
and to survey the relevant references in Selby-Bigge’s British Moralists  collection.  In §3.1, Locke’s 
faculty terminology proved to be somewhat inconsis tent (not surprisingly given his own anti-realist 
view of faculties), but he seemed best  interpreted as taking reason to be a perceptual  faculty that 
embraces intuition  as well as ratiocination.  Then in §3.2 we found that Hume’s contemporaries – 
Shaftesbury, Hutcheson, Price, and Butler – took  the same view less ambivalently.  Thus the 
contemporary textual evidence for the “reason as ra tiocination” interpretation turned out to be 
negligible, and so in §3.3 we took the opportunity to examine (and ultimately to dismiss) what seems 
to be the real basis of its recent popularity: name ly, Hume’s use of words such as “argument” and 
“reasoning” in expressing the conclusion of his fa mous argument.  We found that the standard 
eighteenth-century understanding of these words w as broader than ours, allowing “reasoning” in 
particular to be used as the cognate verb of th e faculty word “reason” as traditionally understood, 
embracing non-inferential rational grounds as well as ra tiocination.  Then in §3.4, we saw – through 
the detailed example of Hutcheson – how this genera l understanding of reason matched a picture of its 
role as the supreme cognitive overseer, perceiving th e deliverances of the lesser  cognitive faculties and 
                                                                                                                                                                      
30 The 1748 and 1750 editions of the Enquiry  also contain a note to E 1.14, referring to “That Faculty, by which we 
discern Truth and Falshood … the Understanding”, and quoted mo re fully in §4.1 below.  Other passages that identify 
reason with the discovery of truth, though usually less explicitly, are at T 2.3.3.3, 2.3.3.5-6, 2. 3.3.8, 3.1.1.4, 3.1.1.19 
n. 69, 3.1.1.25-27, 3.2.2.20, M 1.7, M App  1.6, 1.21.  It is striking that all of these occur in a context where Hume is 
contrasting reason  (or the understanding ) with conative rather than cognitive notions, thus corroborating its 
identification as both the faculty of “truth or falshood” and the overarching cognitive faculty.  21 on that basis making judgements about truth and falsehood.  Traces of this picture are to be clearly 
found in Hume’s texts, though how far his position c onforms to the assumptions behind it remains to 
be seen.  Having now established and defended our ov erview of the Humean faculties on fairly narrow 
textual grounds, it is now time to move on to re view it more deeply and to consider its wider 
philosophical significance: what is its basis in, a nd what light does it shed on, Hume’s philosophy? 
4.1  The cognitive/conative divide 
Here again is the diagram of the Humean faculties from §2.2: 
The biggest divide within this faculty structure, following the standard pattern , is between the general 
domains of “the understanding” and “the  will”.  This divide is clearly reflected in the titles of the first 
two books of the Treatise  – “Of the understanding” and “Of the passions” – and Hume fully accepts 
the fundamental distinction thus implied, between the cognitive  and conative  operations of the mind.31  
Indeed he follows it through far more strictly than most of his contemporaries, insisting (as we saw at 
the end of §2) that reason alone cannot possibly moti vate action independently of the passions.  It is 
precisely in the context of this in sistence that Hume aligns himself most closely with the traditional 
view of reason as the faculty that apprehends truth.  The two  Humean quotations given at the end of 
§3.4 above continue as follows:32 
Reason is the discovery of truth or falshood. Truth or falshood consists in an agreement or disagreement 
either to the real relations of ideas, or to real existence and matter of fact.  Whatever, therefore, is not 
                                                      
31 At E 1.14, Hume cites the distinction between will and understanding as the first of “many obvious distinctions … 
which fall within the comprehension of every human creature”. 
32 See also T 2.3.3.5-6, where Hume denies that a passion can “be contradictory to truth and reason”, and T 3.1.1.15, 
where he denies that an action can be “contrary to truth and reason”.  Rachel Cohon (2008), pp. 69-70 notes this feature of Hume’s language in his famous argument for the inertness of reason, and its oddity when viewed from the 
perspective of David Owen’s interpretation of Humean “reason” as reasoning  (which she nevertheless espouses).  The 
oddity vanishes, and the straightforwardness of Hume’s argument becomes evident, once it is realised that “reason” here is simply a reference to cognition : discovery of what is the case, independent of any conative  influence. the understanding 
(“reason”) the imagination 
(“the fancy”) memory the senses the will
smell hearing taste sight touch reflection 
(“internal 
sense” )external 
senses passions
 22 susceptible of this agreement or disagreement, is incap able of being true or false, and can never be an 
object of our reason.  Now ’tis evident our passions, volitions, and actions, are not susceptible of any 
such agreement or disagreement; being original facts and realities, compleat in themselves, and 
implying no reference to other passions, volitions, and actions.  ’Tis impossible, therefore, they can be pronounc’d either true or false, and be eith er contrary or confor mable to reason.  ( T 3.1.1.9) 
I
T seems evident, that reas on, in a strict sense, as meaning th e judgment of truth and falsehood, can 
never, of itself, be any motive to the will, and ca n have no influence but so far as it touches some 
passion or affection.  Abstract relations  of ideas are the object of curiosity, not of volition.  And matters 
of fact , where they … neither excite desire nor aversion , are totally indifferent …  What is commonly, 
in a popular sense, called reason, and is so much  recommended in moral discourses, is nothing but a 
general and a calm passion, which takes a comprehensive and a distant view of its object, and actuates 
the will, without exciting any sensible emotion.  ( DOP  5.1-2; cf. T 2.3.3.3, M 1.7) 
Here Hume’s use of “reason” is clearly as a conventional reference to the cognitive  domain – the 
domain of truth and falsehood – and for precisely the purpose of drawing a contrast with the conative : 
the domain of the will and passions. 
 Despite Hume’s apparent confidence in hi s strict division between these two domains, 
however, a significant underlying tension emerges if we critically examine the boundary between 
them.  For although he aligns the passions  with the will  within the conative domain, he nevertheless 
classifies them, within his inventory of the furniture of the mind, as impressions  of internal sense 
(T 2.1.1, 2.3.1.1), which most naturally belong on the opposite side.  This mismatch fuels familiar 
difficulties regarding his controversial claim quoted above from Treatise  3.1.1.9, that passions and 
volitions are “original facts and realities, complete in  themselves, and implying no reference to other 
passions, volitions, and actions”.  Viewing them as bare internal impressions (e.g. on the model of a 
feeling of physical pain or tiredness) does indeed su ggest this picture, but their conative nature seems 
on the contrary to require  that they have representative content (e.g. a desire has to be a desire for 
something).  Moreover when Hume famously goes on  to argue that because the passions are “complete 
in themselves”, they cannot “be pronounced … either  contrary or conformable to reason”, it seems to 
be the direction of fit  of their representative content that is doing the crucial work, rather than their 
total lack of such content.33  Perhaps it was his realisation of this tension within his geography of the 
faculties – and the related impoverishment of his view  of “reflection” as an internal sense – that led 
him to drop this famous argument when “recasting” the Treatise  into his later works.  Its ghost 
remains within the passag e quoted above from the Dissertation on the Passions , but in a form that 
appeals to everyday observation of our indifference to truths that “neither excite desire nor aversion”, 
rather than to the principled distinc tion between the cognitive and the conative. 
 Another, more creative, tension across the same  divide – and one of Hume’s most abidingly 
important doctrines – involves the place of taste .  Both morality and aesthetics involve sentiments  or 
passions , and are able to motivate: hence they ought to lie firmly on the conative side.  But both also 
                                                      
33 Hume’s earlier presentation of the argument, at T 2.3.3.5, hints at a recognition that direction of fit is the issue, when 
saying that a passion “contains not any representative quality, which renders it a copy  of any other existence or 
modification … contradiction [to truth and reason] consists in the disagreement of ideas, consider’d as copies , with 
those objects, which they represent” (my emphasis).  23 seem to involve judgement against a standard, thus gi ving the potential for apparent truth or falsehood, 
and Hume is anxious not only to explain this phenomenon but also in some sense to vindicate  it (so a 
crude error theory will not do).  However his faculty  framework seemingly frustrates this aim: reason 
as “the discovery of truth or falsehood” lies on one side of the chasm, the sentiments and passions on 
the other.  Hume’s answer, therefore, is to invent  a new faculty to bridge the two.  Taste becomes “a 
productive faculty ”, generating an artificial system of values,  and it is correspondence with this “new 
creation” which can then serve as the appropria te standard of moral and aesthetic judgement: 
Thus the distinct boundaries and offices of reason and of taste are easily ascertained. The former 
conveys the knowledge of truth and falsehood:  The latter gives the sentiment of beauty and deformity, 
vice and virtue.  The one discovers objects, as they really stand in nature, without addition or diminution:  The other has a productive faculty, and gilding or staining all natural objects with the 
colours, borrowed from internal sentiment, raises, in a manner, a new creation.     ( M App 1.21) 
This strong emphasis on identification of the faculty of taste – with its peculiar bridging position – 
dominates both the first section and the first appendix of the Moral Enquiry .  It also features in a 
revealing footnote from the 1748 and 1750 editions of the first Enquiry , where Hume is looking for a 
paradigm example to illustrate the value of his “mental geography”: 
That Faculty, by which we discern Truth and Falshood, and that by which we perceive Vice and Virtue 
had long been confounded with each other, and all Morality was suppos’d to be built on eternal and 
immutable Relations, which to every intelligent Mind were equally invariable as any Proposition 
concerning Quantity or Number.  But a * late Philosopher has taught us, by the most convincing 
Arguments, that Morality is nothing in the abstract Nature of Things, but is entirely relative to the 
Sentiment or mental Taste of each particular Being;  in the same Manner as the Distinctions of sweet 
and bitter, hot and cold, arise from the particular Feeling of each Sense or Organ.  Moral Perceptions 
therefore, ought not to be clas’d  with the Operations of the Understanding, but with the Tastes or 
Sentiments.  ( E 1.4 n., 1748-50) 
The asterisked note credits “Mr. Hutcheson ” with this important discovery.  Whether Hutcheson 
would have been pleased to have it credited to hi m in quite these terms is another matter, given his 
view that we have a “sense of the fitting and the good” which lies squarely within the domain of the 
understanding.  But the way in which Hume himsel f presents the discovery once again confirms his 
readiness to align himself with what we have seen to be the standard view of reason  or the 
understanding  as “That Faculty, by which we discern Truth and Falshood”. 
4.2  Reason as successful  cognition 
In the passages quoted in the previ ous section, Hume’s references to reason  focus on a contrast with 
passion  and the will , thus distinguishing between the cognitive  and the conative .  In such contexts, 
therefore, reason  for Hume often appears to be simply  the domain of truth and falsehood, of 
judgements and beliefs, with truth and falsehood being viewed equivale ntly and hence with no regard 
for whether or not those judgements and beliefs are rational : 
Reason is the discovery of truth or falshood.  Truth or falshood consists in an agreement or 
disagreement either to the real relations of ideas, or to real existence and matter of fact.  Whatever, 
therefore, is not susceptible of this  agreement or disagreement, is incapable of being true or false, and 
can never be an object of our reason.  ( T 3.1.1.9) 
 24 However it is significant that when Hume talks in th is sort of way (cf. note 30 above), he almost 
invariably either describes reason as discerning  or discovering  truth, or else pairs “truth and reason” 
together.  So such passages are entirely consiste nt with the common-sense thought that reason is 
normatively connected with successful  discernment and discovery, with truth  rather than mere truth-
aptness .  It is simply that when the crucial comp arison for Hume’s current purposes is between the 
cognitive  and the conative  – as in his philosophy of action and mo rality – the question of the truth or 
rationality (or otherwise) of beliefs and judgements is quite irrelevant to his point.  It is then sufficient 
to insist that motivation to action is conative , requiring a passion , and that no belief or judgement – 
however true, false, rational or i rrational it may be – implies a passion.34 
 In Hume’s two other most famous arguments that involve the exclusion of reason from some 
key role, namely those concerning induction and the external world, it seems clear that a normative 
conception of reason – one that implies success  in the discovery of truth, or at least rationality  – is in 
play.  Here first are some relevant passages from the Treatise  discussion of induction: 
If reason determin’d us, it wou’d proceed upon [the Uniformity Principle].  In order therefore to clear 
up this matter, let us consider all the arguments, upon which such a proposition may be suppos’d to be 
founded, and as these must be deriv’d either from knowledge or probability, let us … see whether they 
afford any just conclusion of this nature.  ( T 1.3.6.4, my emphasis) 
Shou’d any one think to elude this argument; and … pretend that all conclusions from causes and 
effects are built on solid  reasoning: …  ’Twere easy for me to show the weakness  of this reasoning, …  
Your appeal to past experience … can never prove , that the same power must continue  …  which 
clearly proves , that the foregoing reasoning had no just foundation.  ( T 1.3.6.8-10, my emphasis) 
Thus not only our reason fails us in the discovery  of the ultimate connexion of causes and effects, but 
even after experience … ’tis impossible for us to satisfy ourselves by our reason , why we shou’d  extend 
that experience …  We suppose, but are never able to prove , that there must be a resemblance [between 
observed and unobserved].  …  Reason can never show us  the connexion of one object with another, 
tho’ aided by experience …  ( T 1.3.6.11-12, my emphasis) 
Likewise from the Enquiry  discussion of induction: 
To endeavour … the proof  of [the Uniformity Principle] by probable arguments … must be evidently 
going in a circle, and taking that for granted, which is the very point in question.  ( E 4.19, my emphasis) 
To say [the inference from past instances to future instances] is experimental, is begging the question.  
…  It is impossible, therefore, th at any arguments from experience can prove  this resemblance of the 
past to the future, since all these arguments are founded on the supposition of that resemblance.  Let the 
course of things be allowed hither to ever so regular; that alone … proves not , that, for the future, it will 
continue so.  ( E 4.21, my emphasis) 
we conclude … that, in all reasonings from experien ce, there is a step taken by the mind, which is not 
supported  by any argument or process of the understanding.  ( E 5.2, my emphasis) 
Hume’s repeated references in  these passages to what can be proved , concluded justly  or supported  by 
                                                      
34 This is not to say, of course, that the formation or contemplation of a belief or judgement cannot cause  a passion to 
arise in us: as Hume was fond of insisting, in principle anything could cause anything, and causation is determined purely by constant conjunction.  (Which implies, however, that fundamentally only events  can be causes or effects, 
something that he blurs in the Treatise  with his talk of “objects”, but appears to recognise more in the Enquiry : see 
E 4.9, 6.4, 7.21-30, and 8.5.)  Hume ’s main point in passages such as T 3.1.1.9 does not concern causal  relations 
between beliefs and passions, but seems rather to be that what we might call the propositional content  of the belief or 
judgement – that which is susceptible of truth or falsehood – is logically quite distinct from any conative state.  25 solid  reasoning, and so forth, clearly evince a normative understanding of reason, as a faculty which 
by its very nature is incapable of yieldi ng fallacious arguments or weak reasoning. 
 Normativity is even more explicit in the Treatise section on “scepticism with regard to the 
senses”, at the point where Hume – having eliminated the senses  as the source of our belief in body – 
goes on to eliminate reason : 
… we can attribute a distinct continu’d ex istence to objects without ever consulting REASON , or 
weighing our opinions by any philosophical principles.  …  Accordingly we find, that all the conclusions, which the vulgar form on this head, are directly contrary to those, which are confirm’d by 
philosophy .  For … the vulgar confound perceptions and objects, and attribute a distinct continu’d 
existence to the very things they feel or see.  This sentiment, then, as it is entirely unreasonable, must 
proceed from some other fa culty than th e understanding .  …  Even after we distinguish our perceptions 
from our objects, ’twill appear presently, that we are still incapable of reasoning  from the existence of 
one to that of the other: So that upon the whole our reason neither does, nor is it possible it ever shou’d 
… give us an assurance of the continu’d and distinct existence of body.  That opinion must be entirely 
owing to the 
IMAGINATION  …  ( T 1.4.2.14, my emphasis) 
The middle sentences of this quotation are expanded on later in the same section: 
the vulgar suppose their perceptions to be th eir only objects …  Now upon that supposition, ’tis a false 
opinion  that any of our objects, or perceptions, are identically the same after an interruption; and 
consequently  the opinion of their identity can never arise from reason  …  ( T 1.4.2.43, my emphasis) 
The only conclusion we can draw from the existence of one thing to that of another, is by means of the 
relation of cause and effect …  But as no beings ar e ever present to the mind but perceptions; it follows 
that we may observe a conjunction or a relation of cause and effect betwixt different perceptions, but 
can never observe it betwixt perceptions and objects.  ’Tis impossible, therefore,  that from the existence 
or any of the qualities of the former, we can ever form any conclusion concerning the existence of the 
latter, or ever satisfy our reason  in this particular.  ( T 1.4.2.47, my emphasis) 
These passages rule out reason as being the source of various opinions on the grounds that they are 
“contrary to … philosophy”, “entirely unreasonable”, “incapable of [being established by] reasoning”, 
or even simply “false”.  Hence, again, it seems that  Hume is here treating reason as a faculty which is 
not merely concerned with the domain of truth a nd falsehood; rather, it looks as though anything that 
is the offspring of reason must, ipso facto, be true, or at least rationally warranted . 
 This normative understanding conforms exactly  with what might be expected from the 
preceding philosophical tradition, which as we  saw in §3.1-4 took reason to be a perceptual  faculty, 
whose operation involves (genuine) apprehension  of truths and of eviden tial connections between the 
ideas supplied by the subordinate cognitive faculties.  But such a treatment might seem to be violently 
at odds with Hume’s own philosophy which rejects th is perceptual model: how can he be so sure, 
apparently on the basis purely of an a priori understanding of reaso n’s nature, that it can only deliver 
truth rather than falsehood, rationa lity rather than folly?  As we sh all soon see, the key to answering 
this question is that Hume’s faculty attri butions are generally to be understood in functional  terms. 
4.3  The senses, memory, and imagination 
The overall shape of Hume’s treatment of the facu lties that yield impressions and ideas – the materials 
of our thoughts – is determined fairly straightforwardl y by the theory that he sp ells out in the first few 
 26 sections of the Treatise .  He starts by explaining the difference between his two species of 
perceptions :  impressions  “enter [our mind] with most force and violence”, and “comprehend all our 
sensations, passions and emotions, as they make their first appearance in the soul”, whereas ideas  are 
“the faint images of these in thinking and reasoning” ( T 1.1.1.1).  He then goes on to argue that ideas 
are quite literally “images” of impressions, in that they are all entirely composed of impression-copy 
content, a conclusion encapsulated in his famous Copy Principle ( T 1.1.1.7).  Next, Hume itemises the 
different types of impression, stating that they can arise either from the external senses  – sight , touch , 
hearing , smell , taste  – or from reflection  (T 1.1.2.1).  The role of the sen ses, both external and internal, 
is thus to supply the impressions – and thereby to generate the ideas – that populate our mind.  Once 
acquired, these ideas can be presented in our thought  “after two different ways”, by either the memory  
or the imagination  (T 1.1.3.1), with memory being “restrain’d to the same order and form with the 
original impressions” ( T 1.1.3.2), whereas the imagination has “ liberty … to transpose and change its 
ideas ” (T 1.1.3.4).  Another important distinction betw een these faculties is that “the ideas of the 
memory are much more lively and strong than tho se of the imagination, and … the former faculty 
paints its objects in more distinct colours” ( T 1.1.3.1).  This anticipates the crucial part played by 
“force and vivacity” in Hume’s theory of belief, as begins to emerge at T 1.3.5.3-7 where he contrasts 
“the impressions of the senses and memory” ( sic.) with the ideas of the imagination. 
 Although the imagination – in contrast to the memory – has freedom to separate “all simple 
ideas”, and to unite them “again in what form it pleases” ( T 1.1.4.1), nevertheless Hume quickly goes 
on to stress that its operations are “guided by some  universal principles”, namely, the principles of 
association of ideas, which are destined to pl ay a major role in the remainder of the Treatise : 
The qualities, from which this association arises, an d by which the mind is after this manner convey’d 
from one idea to another, are three, viz. RESEMBLANCE , CONTIGUITY  in time or place, and CAUSE  and 
EFFECT .  …  These are therefore the principles of union or cohesion among our simple ideas, and in the 
imagination supply the place of that inseparable conne xion, by which they are united in our memory.  
Here is a kind of ATTRACTION , which in the mental world will be found to have as extraordinary effects 
as in the natural, and to show itself in as many and as various forms.  ( T 1.1.4.1, 6) 
Accordingly, in his later discussions Hume will some times treat the attribution of some operation to 
the imagination as virtually equivalent to saying that  it depends on such associative principles, most 
notably in his argument concerning induction:35 
… the next question is, whether experience produces the idea by means of the understanding or 
imagination; whether we are determin’d by reason to make the transition, or by a certain association and relation of perceptions?  ( T 1.3.6.4, cf. 1.3.6.12) 
The association of ideas also features strongly amongst the processes of the imagination that are 
involved in the genesis of the belief in body (e.g. T 1.4.2.22, 34, 37).  But in this complex account 
Hume makes considerable appeal to another process which is likewise attributed to the imagination: 
                                                      
35 The next quotation seems to regard reason and the imagination as alternative agents  of causal inference, but note that 
elsewhere Hume usually speaks of custom acting on the imagination  in such inference (e.g. T 1.3.8.12, 1.3.13.11, 
1.3.14.31; E 5.11).  The imagination is presented as taking a far more active role in Treatise  1.4.2.  27 namely, the supposition of fictions , which enables us to “feign” a real existence connecting together 
our interrupted (but associ ated) perceptions (e.g. T 1.4.2.24, 36, 42), even in spite of such fictions’ 
manifest incoherence (e.g. T 1.4.2.43, 52).  These two types of imaginative process are closely related, 
because what generates a fiction is the transfer ence of force and vivacity through associative 
processes.  And quite generally, Hume tends to ch aracterise any operation involving the vivacity of 
ideas as belonging to the imagination, as when he  says in the final section of Book 1 that “ The 
memory, senses, and understanding are … all of them founded on the imagination, or the vivacity of 
our ideas ”. (T 1.4.7.3). 
 By the time Hume has reached the end of Book 1, of course, he has already concluded – 
notoriously – that a wide range of important mental  operations do indeed depend on the vivacity of 
ideas, and on associative causal principles that conve y such vivacity, rather than on any perception of 
rational connections between ideas.  Thus the imagination, with its associative behaviour that Locke 
had characterised as a “sort of Madness” ( Essay  II xxxiii 3), turns out to be the most significant faculty 
in Hume’s cognitive theory.  Nor is this at all su rprising, for it is only to be expected once reason’s 
pretension to supremacy has been denied.  A strict empiricist about ideas, who takes them all to be 
copies – and thus images  – of impressions, is almost compelled to give a major role to the faculty 
whose very name – imagination  – alludes to the re-presentation of such ideas.36  Within the traditional 
taxonomy of the faculties, the imagination is the only possible source that an em piricist can assign for 
non-rational causal connexions between ideas. 
 We have now seen how Hume’s understanding of the senses, memory and imagination all 
flow straightforwardly from the principles outlined in the first few sections of the Treatise , with each 
of them playing a clear role in his theory of cognition: 
 The senses  Present impressions to the mind (thus creating ideas which copy them). 
 Memory  Replays ideas vivaciously, reflecting their original order. 
 Imagination  Replays ideas less vivaciously, with freedom to transpose and mix them, but 
typically determined by associative causal principles. 
Note that all of these faculties are identified here in functional  terms: the senses, for example, appear 
to be by definition  those aspects of our mental economy that provide a source of impressions.  Our 
earlier discussion suggests that reason  (or the understanding ) and will can also be characterised in 
functional terms, at least when Hume is following the pattern of his predecessors: 
                                                      
36 “Imagination” was traditionally understood (for example by Descartes) as a faculty of sensory images , dealing with 
ideas that are derived from the material body as opposed to those that are purely intellectual.  Hume’s Copy Principle empiricism denies that there are any such intellectual ideas; for an illuminating discussion of these matters, see Garrett 
(1997) chapter 1. 
 28  Reason  The overall cognitive faculty: discove rs and judges truth and falsehood, 
utilising the resources provided by the other cognitive faculties. 
 Will The conative faculty: forms intentions in response to desires and passions. 
If this were the whole story, it would provide a pictur e of the faculties broadly similar to Hutcheson’s.  
But with Hume, inevitably, things are nothing like this simple. 
5  Faculty functions and paradigms 
The outstanding problem comes when we try to make sense of the relationship between reason  and the 
imagination  within this structure.  On the one hand, as we have seen at length above, Hume talks of 
“reason” or “the understanding” in distincti on from “the will”, as indicating our general cognitive  
faculty, and this traditional usage – like the Book division of the Treatise  which reflects it – appears to 
suggest that he sees the understanding  as an umbrella concept covering the entire faculty structure 
apart from the will .  On the other hand, Hume’s detailed account of our intellectual faculties 
notoriously reduces them to operations of the vivacity of ideas, and hence of the imagination , a point 
emphasised by the long footnote from T 1.3.7.5 discussed in §2.1 above, and by a well-known passage 
(already partially quoted in §4.3) from the conclusion of Book 1: 
This error consists in the vulgar division  of the acts of the understanding, into conception , judgment  and 
reasoning , and in the definitions we give of them.  …  What we may in general affirm concerning these 
three acts of the understanding is, that taking them in a proper light, they all resolve themselves into the 
first, and are nothing but particular ways of conceiving our objects.  ( T 1.3.7.5 n. 20) 
... Without this quality, by which the mind enlivens some ideas beyond others (which seemingly is so 
trivial, and so little founded on reason), we cou’ d never assent to any argument, nor carry our view 
beyond those few objects, which are present to our se nses.  Nay, even to these objects we cou’d never 
attribute any existence, but what was dependent on the senses; and must comprehend them entirely in 
that succession of perceptions, which constitutes our self  or person.  Nay farther, even with relation to 
that succession, we cou’d only admit of those perceptions, which are immediately present to our 
consciousness, nor c ou’d those lively images, with  which the memory presents us, be ever receiv’d as 
true pictures of past perceptions.  The memory, senses, and understanding are, therefore, all of them 
founded on the imagination, or the vivacity of our ideas.   (T 1.4.7.3, my emphasis) 
It seems, then, that a faculty structure genuinely re flecting Hume’s theory of the mind would have to 
place the imagination  rather than reason  or the understanding  as the overarching cognitive faculty.  
Why, then, does he continue so often to speak of  “the understanding” as though it played this role, and 
vacillate so indecisively between the tr aditional language and his own novel account?: 
… the understanding or imagination can dr aw inferences from past experience …  ( T 1.3.8.13) 
… the judgment, or rather the imagination …  ( T 1.3.9.19) 
… the imagination or understanding, call it which you please …  ( T 2.3.9.10, also DOP  1.8) 
… my senses, or rather imagination …  ( T 1.4.2.56) 
… the understanding, that is, … the general and more establish’d properties of the imagination  
(T 1.4.7.7) 
One part of the answer – clearly exemplified by th e passages quoted in §4.1 above – is that Hume’s 
use of faculty language, at least within the argumen ts that he uses to establish his novel theory, must  29 reflect not the contours of that finished theory , but rather the position from which his arguments begin .  
He must therefore use terms in a way that is familiar to the audience  whom he wishes to persuade, 
employing notions of “reason”, “imagination” and so forth that are not entirely his own.  But there is 
also another factor that helps to explain the awkwardness of Hume’s language, and which becomes 
apparent if we consider the somewhat paradoxical natu re of his investigation, given the context of his 
functional understanding of the faculties. 
5.1  Faculties, functions, and “distinct agents” 
We have seen that for Hume, as for his contemporari es, the faculties are naturally to be identified in 
functional terms: thus sight , for example, is understood by definition  to be the faculty that presents 
visual impressions (as) of external objects, and memory  is by definition  the faculty that “replays” ideas 
to us in a pattern that (apparently) reflects our reco llection of previous experience.  As the parentheses 
here indicate, sceptical questions can potentially be raised about whether our sight or memory is 
reliable : whether there really are external objects matc hing our visual impressions, or whether what 
we seem to remember really occurred.37  But there does not seem to be room for any legitimate 
question about whether those f aculties have been correctly identified : it would be absurd, for example, 
to maintain that previous philosophers have made a mistake here, and that actually it is our faculty of 
sight that recalls previous experience. 
 It follows from this that such assignment of mental operations to faculties cannot properly be 
regarded as providing any explanation  of those operations; at best, it makes a modest contribution to 
“mental geography, or delineation of the distinct parts and powers of the mind” ( E 1.13).  Hume 
himself was well aware of this, forcefully critic ising scholastic Aristotelians for disguising their 
ignorance through 
their invention of the words faculty  and occult quality .  …  They need only say, that any phaenomenon, 
which puzzles them, arises from a faculty or an occu lt quality, and there is an end of all dispute and 
enquiry upon the matter.  ( T 1.4.3.10) 
In the Dialogues , Philo illustrates the same point with examples:38 
It was usual with the P ERIPATETICS , … when the cause of any phenomenon was demanded, to have 
recourse to their faculties  or occult qualities ; and to say, for instance, that bread nourished by its 
nutritive faculty, and senna purged by its purgative:  But it has been discovered, that this subterfuge was 
nothing but the disguise of ignorance; and that thes e philosophers … really said … that they knew not 
the cause of these phenomena.  ( D 162) 
Such criticism was not by any means or iginal with Hume.  In his 1673 play Le Malade Imaginaire , 
Molière famously ridiculed the doctor who responded to the question “What is the cause and reason, 
                                                      
37 Hume in the Treatise  acknowledges that memory can be defective or imperfect ( T 1.1.3.3), but then goes on to 
attribute false “memories” to the imagination rather than the memory itself ( T 1.3.5.5), suggesting a more rigorously 
functional conception.  A similar pattern may be detectable in the Enquiry : compare E 9.5 n. 20 and 10.5 with E 2.2. 
38 Note also T 1.3.14.7, which emphasises that “these … faculties,  are not in reality any of the known properties of 
bodies, but are perfectly unintelligible and inexplicable.” 
 30 why opium makes one sleep?” with th e answer “Because it contains a dormitive virtue , whose nature 
is to make the senses soporific”.  And Locke was similarly dismissive: 
“the fault has been, that Faculties have been spoken of, and represented, as so many distinct Agents.  
For it being asked, what it was that digested the Meat in our Stomachs?  It was a ready, and very 
satisfactory Answer, to say, That it was the digestive Faculty .  …  What moved?  The Motive Faculty :  
And so in the Mind, the intellectual Faculty , or the Understanding, understood; and the elective Faculty , 
or the Will, willed or commanded: wh ich is in short to say, That the ability to digest, digested; … and 
the ability to understand, understood.  For Faculty , Ability , and Power , I think, are but different names 
of the same things:  Which ways of speaking, when put into more intelligible Words, will, I think, 
amount to thus much; That digestion is performed by some thing that is able to digest; … and 
Understanding by some thing able to understand.”  ( Essay  II xxi 20) 
Locke sees talk of faculties as both unilluminating a nd misleading, tolerating such terms only because 
of “their place in the common use of Languages, that  have made them currant” , in view of which “It 
looks like too much affectation wholly to lay them by” ( ibid.).  So he is, in a sense, anti-realist about 
faculties: talk of a faculty is not talk of a thing  or agent , but rather of a power  or capacity . 
 Given Hume’s account of causation, he has even  more reason than Locke to avoid reifying the 
faculties as though they were “so many distinct agents”: possessing a faculty, for him, ought 
ultimately to reduce to the relevant operations taki ng place in an appropriately law-like manner.  But 
how, then, are we to understand his faculty attributions?  It seems clear that the mental faculties he discusses are indeed definable onl y in functional terms: our memory , for example, can only be 
understood as being that aspect of our ment al economy which is responsible for remembering , because 
we cannot pick it out as a “distinct agent” or entity (e.g. a physical part of the brain) in any other 
way.
39  But then to say that mental operation X is due to our faculty of X-ing  seems vacuous, while to 
say that X is due to some other faculty Y seems almost self-contradictory.40 
 This dilemma seems to apply very straightforwardly to Hume’s famous arguments concerning 
induction and the senses.  Thus we have a faculty of reason , which apparently encompasses by 
definition  whatever aspects of our mental economy are involved in intellectual activities leading to 
“the discovery of truth and falsehood”, of which in ference is generally reckoned to be a paradigm.41  
We also have a faculty of the senses , which presumably encompasses by definition  whatever aspects of 
our mental economy are associated with senso ry awareness.  But then it seems to follow by definition  
that “inference from the impression to the idea”, like a ll other inference that we use for “the discovery 
of truth and falsehood”, must be  “determined by” or “owing to” ( T 1.4.2.14) our faculty of reason.  
                                                      
39 Contrast the case of our ears, which can be physically iden tified quite easily whether or not they are performing their 
usual function.  Faculties, unlike physical organs, ca nnot be identified independently of their function. 
40 Again, contrast the attribution of our sense of balance to our organs of hearing, which makes sense because our 
(independently identifiable) ears turn out to have more than a single function. 
41 Of course Garrett and Owen would claim that inference is reason’s only paradigm activity, but the problem 
addressed here does not depend on such a restricted view of its functions.  Note that they do not interpret reason as “determining” our inferences in general: on their accounts, it is only inference-caused  or mediated  inferences that are 
“determined by reason”.  The points to follow make this claim seem very problematic, but Garrett and Owen both require it in order to sustain their interpretations of Hume’s conclusion concerning induction, which crucially depend on a significant distinction between those inferences that  are “determined by reason” and those that are not.  31 Reason is a faculty , hence a power ,42 and if we ask what effects this power is associated with, then 
inferences to matter of fact  will be one obvious – if almost vac uous – answer (demonstrative inference 
will be another).  But then how could it possibly be, as Hume is apparently claiming, that inductive 
inference is not determined by that very faculty wh ich encapsulates our power of inference?  Likewise, 
from this point of view, it might well seem absurd to deny, as Hume apparently  does, that our sensory 
beliefs in “the continu’d and distinct ex istence of body” are due to “the senses”. 
5.2  Sub-processes and faculty paradigms 
Hume’s procedure is evidently intended to be neith er vacuous nor absurd, and its real point becomes 
clear if we look in a bit more detail at the results that he takes it to achieve.  In the case of induction, 
he shows that inference from past to future crucia lly involves a process of extrapolation that cannot be 
independently justified by anything within our cognitive grasp.  This crucial step is instead founded on 
a type of associative process, whereby past experi ence causes certain ideas about the future to be 
enlivened into beliefs.  Likewise in the case of the external world, he argues that our belief in the 
continued and distinct existence of body depe nds crucially on various associative and related 
processes, notably those that involve the construction of “fictions”. 
 All well and good, but how, one might reasona bly ask, can this dispel the air of paradox 
associated with Hume’s claim that the mind’s inductive behaviour “is not determin’d by reason” (T 1.3.6.12)?  Suppose he is correct that the underlying mental mechanism whereby we perform 
inductive inferences involves some associative process of the type he describes: surely all this means 
is that our faculty of reason  – the faculty which, by definition, is the source of our inductive inferences 
– must itself  incorporate such an associa tive process.  Likewise with his claim about our belief in 
external objects: at most he seems to  have shown that our sensory faculties themselves  incorporate a 
process of association (and of fiction-formation etc.).  But then he presumably has no basis for 
assigning all these associative processes to the imagination in particular, in preference  to reason or the 
senses.  Seen from this perspectiv e, therefore, Hume’s way of assigning processes to faculties still 
appears fundamentally confused.  He  seems to be  treating faculties in precisely the way that Locke 
decried – as “so many distinct agents” – as though th e reasoning faculty or the sensory faculty, unable 
by themselves to perform inductive inferences or to es tablish the belief in body, were forced to call in 
the help of the imaginativ e faculty to lend a hand. 
 Fortunately the solution to all this becomes fairly straightforward once we recognise that 
Hume’s talk of faculties, like that of Locke, can onl y be interpreted – on his ow n principles (cf. §5.1) – 
                                                     
 
42 See for example E 1.13-14 for the equation of “faculties” with “powers”, and also T Intro.4, 1.3.10.9.  The same 
equation is repeatedly found in Locke, e.g. “The power of  thinking is called the understanding, and the power of 
volition is called the will; and these two powers or abilities in the mind are denominated fa culties.” (II vi 1; see also 
II xxi 20 quoted above, and cf. II xxi 15, 17).  Note in passi ng that for Hume, it is the “object” that possesses the power 
that is spoken of as the cause of  its effect, not the power itself (see E 7.29 n. 17 and cf. note 34 above). 
 32 as a façon de parler rather than as an intended literal reference to “distinct agen ts”.  For it follows that 
when he talks of the imagination  as playing a crucial role in induc tive inference or the genesis of 
belief in body, he can only mean that some process of a type that pertains to the imagination  – what 
we might call an “imagination-like” process – is play ing such a role.  The paradigm of what counts as 
an imagination-like process here is evidently on e that involves the communication of force and 
vivacity by associative (rather than rational) c onnexions between ideas, and possibly the consequent 
generation of fictions.  So in ascrib ing such processes to the imagination, Hume is using faculty 
language to classify those processes , within arguments whose apparent point is precisely to identify 
the types of underlying process that are invol ved in various important mental operations. 
 The upshot is that what Hume is doing in th e case of induction and the external world is to 
perform a deep analysis of what the relevant human  power involves – identifying the conceptual steps 
that are implicit in its activity – and then to use faculty language to express those underlying steps .  
The faculty language that he uses for this purpose s eems to be broadly traditional, with “reason”, “the 
senses” and “the imagination” all representing the kinds of processes (respectively apprehension of 
truth, sensory awareness, and association of id eas etc.) that would generally be considered 
paradigmatic of those faculties.  Accordingly, where the underlying step is imagination-like – that is, 
involving processes such as the communication of vi vacity through association – Hume describes that 
step as owing to “the imagination”, even if the step concerned is located, within our cognitive 
economy, as part of the operation of our reasoning or our senses .  Thus his talk of the faculties does 
not, after all, offend against Locke’s strictures: wh en he claims that the imagination plays a crucial 
role in inductive inference, he is not thinking of  our imaginative faculty as a distinct agent which 
intervenes to assist our reasoning faculty.  Rather, his claim is to be understood as saying that our 
process of making inductive inferences itself  crucially involves an imagination-like  sub-process. 
 In performing this sort of analysis, Hume typically focuses on one particularly vital or 
problematic step.  When investigating induction, for example, he is well aware that such inference can 
be a very complex process, with many factors taken into account (for example his “rules by which to judge of causes and effects” of T 1.3.15).  But when setting out to identify the foundation of inductive 
inference, he ignores these complications and fo cuses his attention on the one crucial step of 
extrapolation from observed to unobserved which is , in effect, the supposition of a principle of 
uniformity between them.  Having discovered that th is one step is founded on associative mechanisms, 
he is then happy to declare that induc tive inference in general is so founded:
43 
                                                      
43 Hume identifies “the foundation” of causal or inductive inference as – or says that it is “founded on” – the initial 
impression from which the inference starts ( T 1.3.5.7, 1.3.6.6, 1.3. 7.6, 1.3.8.9, 1.3.16.6), the relation of cause and 
effect ( T 1.3.6.7; E 4.4, 4.14), experience ( T 1.3.6.4; E 4.14, 12.29), the customary transition of the imagination 
(T 1.3.9.19, 1.3.13.9, 1.3.14.21, 1.4.4.1), imagination and the vivacity of ideas (1.4.7.3), or the Uniformity Principle 
(T 1.3.6.7; E 4.21), while denying that it is “founded on” “reasoning or any process of the understanding” ( E 4.15) or 
“any process of argument or reasoning” ( E 9.5).  His second favourite locution is to say that causal reasoning is 
“determin’d” by custom ( T 1.3.7.6, 1.3.14.1, 1.3.14.31; A 15, 16, 21, 25; E 5.4-5, 6.4, 8.5) or associational principles 
(T 1.3.6.4, 1.3.6.12), while denying (in most of the same pass ages) that it is “determin’d” by reason.  But Hume never 
speaks of determination by the imagination  itself; only by principles of the imagination .  In describing his position in  33 When the mind … passes from the idea or impression of one object to the idea or belief of another, it is 
not determin’d by reason, but by certain principles, which associate together th e ideas of these objects, 
and unite them in the imagination.  …  The inference therefore depends solely  on the union of ideas.  
(T 1.3.6.12, my emphasis) 
all reasonings are nothing but  the effects of custom, and custom has no influence, but by enlivening the 
imagination, and giving us a strong conception of any object.  ( T 1.3.13.11, my emphasis) 
Likewise with the external world, he focuses on the crucial step that takes us from interrupted sense 
impressions to our “assurance of the continu’d and di stinct existence of body”, aiming to show that: 
That opinion must be entirely owing  to the IMAGINATION   (T 1.4.2.14, my emphasis). 
Given the complications that Hume knows to be involved in these cases, “depends solely” , “nothing 
but”, and “entirely owing”  are presumably not intended to imply that the relevant cognitive operations 
involve only imagination-like principles: induction, as we have noted, can involve the application of 
explicit rules ( T 1.3.15) and even the identification of underlying mathematical patterns ( E 4.13, 
7.29 n. 17), while the belief in body builds on sensory impressions.  His intention seems, rather, to 
emphasise that these cognitive operations involve a crucial step to which imagination-like principles 
are essential:  without the influence of such principles, th at step would fail and the cognitive operations 
could not take place.  Here reason  and the senses  are generally relegated to the background, with 
Hume’s primary interest being in steps that are attributable to the imagination .  He takes it that even 
one such step is sufficient to pr event the entire process of which it is a part from being said to be 
founded on reason (or on the senses), just as one inva lid step within a sequential inference typically 
renders the entire inference invalid.  Hume’s main philosophical interest in the role of reason, 
therefore, is in showing that reason-like processes are not wholly  responsible for the cognitive 
operations in question, and so he focuses on the cruc ial step which he thinks can show this.  Thus 
when he denies that a process is “determin’d by reas on”, this is apparently to  be understood as denying 
that it is entirely  attributable to reason,44 whereas a process that is “founde d on the imagination” need 
only involve at least one  imagination-like step.45 
5.3  The paradigmatic activities of the senses and reason 
If the characteristic principles of the imagination  are those involving the asso ciation of ideas, transfer 
of vivacity, and the invention of “fiction s”, then the characteristic principles of the senses  are – at least 
in the context of Hume’s discussion in Treatise  1.4.2 – those involving the mind’s immediate receipt 
                                                                                                                                                                      
what follows it seems best to rely on the notion of founding , which is sufficiently flexible to be used without begging 
questions about the nature of the relevant foundational rela tions.  I shall henceforth take for granted – until §7.1 below 
– that nothing significant hangs on any distinction between foundation and determination, which seems a reasonable initial presumption given the many different ways in which Hume expresses what appear to be similar thoughts. 
44 However “ entirely  attributable to reason” in the relevant sense need not imply in turn that every sub-process  of the 
sub-processes  involved must be reason-like: see §§6.4-7.2 below. 
45 In the Moral Enquiry  Hume’s language becomes more even-handed between the faculties.  Compare for example the 
titles of T 3.1.1.1-2: “Moral distinctions not deriv’d from reason”  and “Moral distinctions deriv’d from a moral sense” 
with M 1.9: “… reason  and sentiment  concur in almost all moral determinations and conclusions”. 
 34 of sensory impressions .  This is made very clear by his arguments for eliminating the senses as the 
source of our belief in the continue d and distinct existence of body ( T 1.4.2.3-13): 
That our senses offer not their impressions as the images of something distinct , or independent , and 
external , is evident; because they convey  to us nothing but a single perception, and never give us the 
least intimation of any thing beyond.  ( T 1.4.2.4) 
… properly speaking, ’tis not our body we perceive, when we regard our limbs and members, but 
certain impressions, which enter by the senses; so th at the ascribing a real a nd corporeal existence to 
these impressions, or to their objects, is an act of  the mind as difficult to explain, as that which we 
examine at present.  ( T 1.4.2.9) 
… there are three different kinds of impressions convey’d by the senses.  …  ’Tis … evident, that 
colours, sounds, &c. are originally on the same footing with the pain that arises from steel, and pleasure 
that proceeds from a fire; and that the difference betwixt them is founded neither on perception nor 
reason, but on the imagination.  For as they are confest to be, both of them, nothing but perceptions … wherein possibly can their difference consist?  Upon the whole, then, we may conclude, that as far as 
the senses are judges, all perceptions are the same in the manner of their existence.  ( T 1.4.2.13) 
Again, Hume can hardly be denying that our belie f in body is associated w ith the normal operation of 
our senses (and hence can be said to arise from “the  senses”, understood in the correspondingly broad 
manner, just as our inductive beliefs can be said to arise from our faculty of reasoning).  Rather, he is 
simply insisting that this normal operation itself involves a sub-process  which is imagination-like  
rather than sense-like , on the ground that sense-like processes by themselves are inadequate to the 
task.  And his paradigm of a sense-like process, for the purpose of this comparison, is the bare appearance of an impression to the mind. 
 What, then, of reason ?  What, for Hume’s purposes, counts as a reason-like  process?  The 
obvious answer, in view of our discussion in §4.2 above, is that the characteristic principles of 
“reason” are those involving successful cognition or apprehension of truth.  But there are complications here, partly because of reason’s trad itional role as the overarching cognitive faculty to 
which other faculties such as the senses “report”.  And indeed we find that in different contexts, 
Hume’s discussions that are intended to assess reason’s role as the foundation of particular mental operations appeal to a variety of other processes. 
 At Treatise  1.3.6.4-6, Hume seems simply to take fo r granted that “If reason determin’d us” to 
make causal inferences, then it must do so on the basis of either a demonstrative or a probable 
argument for the Uniformity Principle.
46  But this narrow focus on inference  appears to be exceptional.  
In Enquiry  4, by contrast, his discussion makes a point of eliminating not only demonstrative and 
probable (moral, factual) inference, but also sensation and intuition,47 as potential grounds for the 
                                                      
46 This passage generates a natural te mptation, for those who focus on the Treatise  discussion of induction, to read 
“reason” in the relevant sense as a faculty exclusively concerned with stepwise inference : see for example Garrett 
(1997), pp. 82-5, 94; Noonan (1999), pp. 118-9; Owen (1999), p. 120. 
47 This was first noted by Millican (1995), pp. 109-10, but not emphasised until Millican (2002), pp. 155-6, which 
drew attention to the passage from Hume’s Letter .  Although Millican’s analysis of Enquiry  4 has some force against 
the “reason as inference” interpretations, I would put more em phasis on the historical considerations in §3.1-4 above, 
and the implausibility of claiming that Hume would not consider intuition  to be an operation of reason when he so 
frequently treats it alongside demonstration (e.g. T 1.3.3, 1.3.6.7, 1.3.7. 3, 1.3.14.35, 2.3.2.2; E 4.1, 4.21, 8.22 n. 18).   35 Uniformity Principle.  And the significance of th is procedure is corroborated by a passage from 
Hume’s Letter from a Gentleman to his Friend in Edinburgh , written in the same period: 
It is common for Philosophers to distinguish the Kinds of Evidence into intuitive , demonstrative , 
sensible , and moral   (L 22). 
If reason  is understood by Hume in the standard way of his contemporaries, as the overall cognitive 
faculty, then we should indeed expect it to  embrace all four “Kinds of Evidence”. 
 In Treatise  1.4.2, as we saw in §4.2, Hume rules out  reason as the source of any belief in body 
on the ground that this belief involves elements th at are “entirely unreasonable”, “false”, or impossible 
to establish by legitimate causal reasoning.  In Treatise  3.1.1, as we saw in §4.1, he rules out reason as 
the foundation of morality on the basis that its operati ons are confined to “the discovery of truth or 
falshood … [which] consists in an agr eement or disagreement either to the real relations of ideas, or to 
real existence and matter of fact” ( T 3.1.1.9).  This is clearly compatible with seeing reason as 
embracing any “kind of evidence” that can lead us to  discovery of “relations of ideas” (i.e. intuition 
and demonstration) or “real existence and matter of  fact” (i.e. sensation and factual inference).  It 
therefore fits comfortably with the broad picture of reason’s resources implied by Enquiry  4, as does 
the parallel discussion in Appendix 1 of the Moral Enquiry  (especially paragraphs 2, 6 and 7). 
 There are passages in the Treatise  discussions of the motivating influence of the passions and 
morality that suggest a much narrower view of reason, which on one occasion is said to be “nothing but the discovery of [cause and effect]” ( T 2.3.3.3) and more frequently is limited to the “comparison 
of ideas” ( T 3.1.2.1 and 3.3.1.15, cf. 3.1. 1.4, 3.1.1.24, 3.2. 2.20).  However there is little basis for 
seeing these passages as bearing much interpretative we ight, since the relevant restriction is always 
tailored to the specific point that Hume is making in that context.
48  Moreover most of these passages 
occur in close proximity to others that very explic itly recognise a view of reason that extends to both 
relations of ideas and matters of fact (e.g. T 2.3.3.2, 3.1.1.18, 3.1.1.19 n. 69, 3.1.1.26). 
6  The ambiguity thesis 
So far, we have encountered no compelling ground for taking Hume’s  faculty term “reason” to be 
ambiguous, though further reflection on his argumen t concerning induction quickly reveals why the 
thesis has seemed attractive.  In that argum ent, Hume concludes that causal reasoning ( Treatise ) or 
factual inference in general ( Enquiry ) arises from the imagination rather  than reason, on the basis that 
a crucial step within its operation is perform ed by a non-rational associative process, a mental 
mechanism that is not governed by any perception of truth or evidence.  From this, it naturally seems 
                                                      
48 For example, he is opposing rationalistic theories of morality and justice at T 3.1.1.4, 3.1.1.24,  and 3.2.2.20, and 
discussing the motivating influence of causal relations at T 2.3.3.3.  The passages at T 3.1.2.1 and 3.3.1.15 seem to be 
appealing to a supposed (but questionable) analogy between the reason/sentiment distinction and the idea/impression distinction, whereby reason is said to involve the “comparison of ideas”, so that eliminating reason as the foundation of morality leaves impressions – and therefore moral sentiments – as the only remaining possibility. 
 36 to follow that such inference must be excluded  from any place amongst the legitimate operations of 
reason, a faculty which appears to be understood – by both Hume and his contemporaries – as defined 
by its paradigmatic function of truth-apprehension.49  Accordingly, most interpreters (with the obvious 
exception of Garrett and others who take any inferen ce, by definition, to be an operation of reason) 
have assumed that Hume’s famous argument of Treatise  1.3.6 and Enquiry  4, by denying induction 
any foundation in reason , must ipso facto disqualify it from being an operation of reason . 
 Yet as we have just seen, this natural assumpti on is in serious tension with Hume’s procedure 
in his later arguments concerning the external world ( Treatise  1.4.2) and the foundation of moral 
distinctions ( Treatise  3.1.1).  In the first of these, Hume de nies the role of reason in generating the 
“philosophical” belief in continued and distinct existence on the ground that causal reasoning based on 
constant conjunction can get no purchase when attemp ting to draw an inference from perceptions to 
objects.  Because we are acquainted only with pe rceptions, and never directly with their supposed 
objects, we are unable to observe any constant conjunction between the two, and hence we cannot 
extrapolate any such conjunction to new instances (see T 1.4.2.47, quoted in §4.2 above).  This seems 
clearly to presuppose that if we could  – per impossibile – establish the desired constant conjunction 
from observation, then inductive extrapola tion of that conjunction to unobserved cases would count as 
an operation of reason .  Likewise, when arguing that reason cannot provide a foundation for morality, 
Hume explicitly (and repeatedly) includes within  its domain the discovery of cause and effect 
relationships, existential propositions, and even “matter of fact” in general:50 
… reason, in a strict and philosophical sense, can have an influence on our conduct … by informing us 
of the existence of something which is a proper object of [a passion]; or when it discovers the 
connexion of causes and effects, so as to afford us means of exerting any passion.  ( T 3.1.1.12) 
… the operations of human understanding divide themselves into two kinds, the comparing of ideas, 
and the inferring of matter of fact …  ( T 3.1.1.18) 
This again seems clearly to imply that he counts inductive inference as a legitimate  operation of 
reason, contradicting the apparent upsho t of his argument concerning induction. 
6.1  Ambiguities in “reason” and “the imagination” 
It is considerations such as these that have mainly fuelled the popularity of the claim that Hume’s use 
of the term “reason” is ambiguous.51  On this style of interpretation,  he is operating with (at least) two 
quite distinct levels of normative rigour, one of  which accommodates inductive reasoning within its 
                                                      
49 Recall Hume’s standard assumption, highlighted in the final paragraph of §5.2 above, that a single non-rational step 
is sufficient to exclude an entire mental process from being founded on reason. 
50 See also the quotations in §4.1 above, and some of th e other passages cited in the final paragraph of §5.3. 
51 See §1 above.  An influential early statement of the cl aim is Winters (1979), which starts by focusing on “Conflict 
between Book I and Books II and III” (pp. 134-6) based on passag es such as those just discussed.  Other scholars who 
have alleged some such ambiguity include Beauchamp et al.  (1975, pp. 76-8; 1981, pp. 41-5, 63-7), Norton (1982, 
pp. 96-8 n. 4), Baier (1991, pp. 60-1, 278), Millican ( 1995, pp. 130-2), Owen (1999, pp.  130-4), and Loeb (2002, 
pp. 53-9).  Garrett (1997, pp. 94-5) has been distin ctive in consistently opposing the ambiguity thesis.  37 scope, while the other does not.  Thus on the more demanding “rationalistic” interpretation of “reason” 
– most often taken to be deductivist  in nature – inductive reasoning fa ils to qualify and hence must be 
attributed to “the imagination”, as pr oved in Hume’s famous argument of Treatise  1.3.6.  But when 
later moving on to consider such topics as the exte rnal world or morality, he apparently relaxes the 
constraints, is perfectly content to allow inductiv e reasoning to qualify as a respectable operation of 
“reason”, and accordingly dismisses as due to “the im agination” only matters that lie beyond the reach 
of both deductive and inductive reasoning.  Typically it will be this second, more relaxed notion of 
reason that is interpreted as being genuinely Hu mean, with his argument concerning induction being 
understood as implicitly a rejection  of the more rigorous “rationalis tic” notion, by showing its total 
impotence to prove anything about unobserved matters of fact. 
 If Hume is operating with two quite distinct notions of normative “reas on”, each with its own 
standard of rigour, then apparently we must also  recognise a third, non-normative notion within his 
work, when he simply intends to refer to the na tural faculty of human c ognition or “understanding”, 
with all its faults and however it might operate.52  Something like this seems to be the intended sense 
in the title of the Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding  and of Book 1 of the Treatise , “Of the 
understanding”.  Such an intention is even clearer  within the section of each  work that discusses “the 
reason of animals”, where Hume refers to “the reasoning faculty of brutes, as well as that of human creatures” ( T  1.3.16.12).  In this sense, apparently, a ssigning an operation to “reason” need have no 
normative implications, given that our natural faculty – and a fortiori  that of other animals – can be 
“deceitful” ( T 1.4.1.1), “fallacious” ( E 5.22), “weak” ( T 1.4.1.6; E 7.24, 7.28, 12.21), “infirm” 
(E 12.24), and even “blundering” ( T 3.3.1.24). 
 The ambiguity claim about “reason” is corroborat ed by an apparently related ambiguity which 
Hume himself identifies in his talk of the imagination , and whose basis becomes clear if we delve 
deeper into what he takes to be paradigmatic of th at faculty’s activities.  In §4.3, I suggested that 
Hume views the characteristic processes of the imagination as including transfer of vivacity through 
association of ideas , and imaginative construction of fictions .  Association of ideas turns out to play a 
crucial role in many of our most important mental  operations both cognitive and conative, for example 
                                                     
 
52 See Millican 1995, p. 130 and 1998, pp. 156-7 n. 3.  Note th at in addition to the major uses of “reason” discussed 
here, Hume also points out (or uses himself) various “improper” senses, which add to the potential for confusion.  For 
example the “calm passions” play a significant role in his theories of the passions and morals ( T 2.3.3.3-10), but are 
commonly misidentified as “reason” ( T 2.3.3.4, 2.3.9.13).  Ag ain, we call “reason” our attempts to “give the 
preference to whatever is in itself preferable, wit hout considering its situation and circumstances” ( T 3.2.7.5, cf. 
M 6.15), correcting our natural tendency to be more affected by immediate than remote benefi ts.  These two seem to be 
brought together when Hume talks of “that reason , which is able to oppose our passion; and which we have found to 
be nothing but a general calm determination of the passions, founded on some distant view or reflexion” ( T 3.3.1.18).  
In a long footnote at E 5.5 n. 8, Hume discusses the commonly made distinction “between reason  and experience ”, 
where the former is supposed to be “the mere resu lt of our intellectual faculties, which, by considering a priori  the 
nature of things … establish particular principles of scie nce and philosophy”.  This distinction he then attacks as 
“erroneous, at least, superficial”.  On one occasion in the Treatise  he seems to use “reason” in a similarly superficial 
sense, in which reason  is distinguished from authority : “I have all along endeavour’d to establish my system on pure 
reason, and have scarce ever cited the judgment ev en of philosophers or historians on any article” ( T 3.2.8.8). 
 38 inductive inference, the explanation of prid e and humility, and the operation of sympathy.53  
Imaginative construction of fictions combines w ith association to create our belief in body, and 
likewise generates various other beliefs, including substance ( T 1.1.6.2) and the self ( T 1.4.6.6-7, 21).54  
In §4.1 we saw that imaginative construction also pl ays a central role in Hume’s theory of morals, 
whereby the “gilding or staining” of taste “raises … a new creation” ( M App 1.21) so as to provide our 
moral judgements with a relatively objective measu re.  “The imagination”, Hume says in the Treatise , 
“adheres to the general  views of things, and distinguishes betw ixt the feelings they produce, and those 
which arise from our particular and momentary situation” ( T 3.3.1.23).  This kind of systematic 
imaginative construction is also invoked in his tr eatment of causal reasoning, when he comes to 
explain why causation alone of the three associa tive relations is able to generate belief: 
Of [our] … ideas of the memory we form a kind of  system, … and every particular of that system, 
join’d to the present impressions, we … call a reality .  But the mind … finding, that with this system of 
perceptions there is another connected by … the relation of cause or effect, it proceeds to the 
consideration of their ideas; and as it feels that ’tis  … necessarily determin’d to view these particular 
ideas [without] the least change, it forms them into  a new system, which it likewise dignifies with the 
title of realities .  The first of these systems is the object of the memory and senses; the second of the 
judgment.  ’Tis this latter principle, which peoples the world, and brings us acquainted with such 
existences, as … lie beyond the reach of the senses and memory.  By means of it I paint the universe in 
my imagination, and fix my attention on any part of it I please.  I form an idea of Rome , which I neither 
see nor remember …  All this, and every thing else wh ich I believe, are nothing but ideas, tho’ by their 
force and settled order, arising from custom and th e relation of cause and effect, they distinguish 
themselves from the other ideas, which are merely the offspring of the imagination.  ( T 1.3.9.3-4) 
Note, however, a tension in this last  passage.  On the one hand, it is my imagination that enables me to 
“paint the universe … and fix my attention on any part of it”, thus creating my view of reality .  But on 
the other hand, the settled and ordered ideas that lie within this system are to be distinguished from 
“the other ideas, which are merely the offspring of  the imagination”.  The intended distinction is 
between beliefs “of the judgment” that are solidly founded on causal reasoning from experience (with 
their corresponding “force and settled order”) and tho se having no such foundation.  But since causal 
reasoning – on Hume’s own account – is itself “merely the offspring of the imagination”, it seems that 
he must be using “the imagination” ambiguously here .  At the end of the section he admits as much, in 
a footnote specially inserted (by means of  a printer’s “cancel” sheet) while the Treatise  was in press:55 
In general we may observe, that as our assent to all probable reasonings is founded on the vivacity of 
ideas, it resembles many of those whimsies and prejudices, which are rejected under the opprobrious 
                                                      
53 Hume famously comments in the Abstract  that “the principle of the association of ideas … enters into most of his 
philosophy” ( A 35), but this is far more true of the Treatise  than of the later works.  The only significant associative 
explanation remaining in the Enquiry  is the special case of causation and inductive belief, which is not anyway 
straightforward association  of ideas, since custom generates new beliefs rather than merely carrying the mind between 
pre-existing ideas (cf. E 5.20).  The Moral Enquiry  mentions the association of ideas at 4.7, 5.14, and 5.38, but not in 
any crucial role, and the associative account of the operation of sympathy at T 2.1.11.5-7 seems to be implicitly 
disavowed at M 5.17 n. 19.  Associationist explanations remain most prominent in the Dissertation on the Passions , 
for example in the explanation of pride and humility (2.6 ff.). 
54 For a very useful discussion of Humean fictions, see Traiger (1987). 
55 For details of this and the related note at T 2.2.7.6, which Hume apparently intended to have deleted as the same 
time, see the Nortons’ critical edition of the Treatise , vol. 2 pp. 592-4.  The footnote seems to belong at the end of 
T 1.3.9.4, so presumably it was inserted at the end of th e section to avoid having to reset earlier pages on the press.  39 character of being the offspring of  the imagination.  By this expression it appears that the word, 
imagination, is commonly us’d in two different sens es; and tho’ nothing be more contrary to true 
philosophy, than this inaccuracy, yet in the following reasonings I ha ve often been oblig’d to fall into it.  
When I oppose the imagination to the memory, I mean the faculty, by which we form our fainter ideas.  When I oppose it to reason, I m ean the same faculty, excluding only our demonstrative and probable 
reasonings.  ( T 1.3.9.19 n. 22) 
This makes explicit a third characteristic ac tivity of “the imagination”, namely, its fabrication of 
whimsies and prejudices  unconstrained by the discipline of cau sal reasoning.  These are quite properly 
to be rejected as respectable cognitive operations, a nd are indeed standardly deprecated as being mere 
“offspring of the imagination”.  But such usage of the faculty term, though Hume fully agrees with the 
dismissive attitude it evinces, is problematic for hi m.  Having identified so many cognitively vital 
associative and constructive processes as operations  of “the imagination” , he is understandably 
reluctant to see these categorised together with mere superstitions a nd fantasies.  He therefore coins a 
more restricted usage of the term “imagination”, confined to the mind’s disreputable operations, and 
which therefore excludes  “our demonstrative and probable reasonings”.56  Thus our respectable 
reasonings – for all that they depend on the associat ion and enlivening of ideas – can be removed from 
the domain of “the imagination” and instead classi fied under a differently named faculty, with the 
honorific title of “reason”.57 
 If one is tempted by the idea that Hume uses two normative senses of “reason”, which differ 
according to whether induction is included or excluded  within its bounds, then it seems very attractive 
to link this with his openly acknow ledged ambiguity in “the imagina tion” (cf. Millican 1995, p. 131).  
His familiar method of framing a discussion, by asking whether some key mental process is due to 
reason  or the imagination , suggests that these are being used as complementary terms, with “the 
imagination” as a catch-all category for whatever fa ils to qualify as part of “reason”.  And if this 
suggestion is correct, then Hume’s acknowledged am biguity in “the imagination”, depending as it 
does on whether our standard methods of reasoning ar e considered too respectable to deserve “the 
opprobrious character of being the offspring of  the imagination”, will presumably imply a 
complementary ambiguity in “reason”. 
6.2  An alternative to the ambiguity thesis 
The case for an ambiguity in Humean “reason” outlin ed in the previous section is strong, but not 
decisive.  First, as Garrett has rightly insisted ( 1998, p. 194 n. 7), Hume’s acknowledged ambiguity in 
“the imagination” does not straightforwardly impl y any corresponding ambiguity in “reason”.  Despite 
                                                      
56 In the Enquiry  this ambiguity is less evident, partly because Hume downplays the faculty language which is so 
prominent in the Treatise .  When he does speak of the imagination, it is normally in the more restricted sense, and he 
repeatedly stresses a contrast between custom and the “loose reveries” of the imagination ( E 5.11, 5.13, 5.20).  In the 
Treatise , custom is described as “a principle of association” ( T 1.3.7.6), whereas in the Enquiry , custom is given more 
distinctive prominence and is said only to be analogous  or “of a similar nature” to the association of ideas ( E 5.20). 
57 Hume sketches a justification for his division between the respectable (“permanent, irresistable, and universal”) and 
disreputable (“changeable, weak, and irregular”) opera tions of the imagination in a famous passage at T 1.4.4.1. 
 40 Hume’s tendency to oppose the two to each other, it is quite possible that he is treating “the 
imagination” as more than a mere negative catch-a ll.  And this suggestion can now be given more 
substance in the light of our earlie r discussion: it seems that his categorisation of a mental process as 
founded on “the imagination” can be underst ood as having a clearly positive (if admittedly 
ambiguous) meaning, namely, that the process in qu estion depends – at least in part – on such 
underlying mechanisms as the association of ideas, im aginative construction, or fanciful whimsies and 
prejudices.  There is no doubt that Hume sees i nductive inference as having such a dependence (on 
customary association), and this could justify incl uding such inference within the domain of “the 
imagination” without thereby implying that it must cease to lie within the domain of “reason”  (that is, 
the domain of cognitive processes that  enable “discovery of truth or falshood”).  There are, indeed, 
well-known passages (cf. §5 above) in which Hume  either attributes inductive inference to both “the 
understanding” and “the imagination” (e.g. “the understa nding or imagination can draw inferences 
from past experience”, T 1.3.8.13), or even explicitly includes one  faculty within the other (e.g. “the 
understanding, that is, … the general and more  establish’d properties of the imagination”, T 1.4.7.7).  
If the suggestion made here is correct, then it co uld indeed be possible in principle for the two 
faculties to overlap (despite Hume’s tendency often to place them in opposition to each other), and 
hence we do not need to interpret these passages as paradoxical. 
 There are, however, some further complicati ons here, because the case just made – and also 
the quotations from Hume – somewhat run together two distinguishable issues: (a) whether induction 
is founded on reason (or the imagination) , and (b) whether induction is to be counted as itself an 
operation of reason (or the imagination) .  We shall return to these issues in §7 below; for now, the key 
point is simply that there is no straightforwar d implication from Hume’s acknowledged ambiguity in 
his use of “the imagination” to a corresponding ambiguity of “reason”.  So what might have been thought to be a decisive argument for the latter ambiguity is undermined. 
6.3  Ambiguity, and flexibility of language 
A second and more general reason fo r doubting the ambiguity thesis, at least in the relatively crude 
form in which it has dominated so much of th e interpretative literature on Hume on induction, 
concerns the nature of language itself.  In §§3.2-4.2 our discussion indicated that Hume’s 
understanding of the word “reason” essentially follow s that of his contemporaries, meaning our faculty 
for discovery of truth or falsehood , or apprehension of what is the case  (“truth-apprehension” for 
short).  But this leaves open a wide range of possi ble uses of the word, which seem to match – at least 
roughly – with the following passages from Hume: 
(a) The human (or animal) faculty of truth-appreh ension, however well and by whatever processes it 
might operate: 
Our reason must be consider’d as a kind of cause, of which truth is the natural effect; but such-a-
one as by the irruption of other causes, and by the inconstancy of our mental powers, may 
frequently be prevented.  ( T 1.4.1.1);  Men are superior to beasts principally by the superiority of  41 their reason; and they are the degrees of the same  faculty, which set such an infinite difference 
betwixt one man and another.  ( T 3.3.4.5) 
(b) Those human (or animal) processes that we standa rdly take to be involved in truth-apprehension, 
even if they turn out not to be truth-conducive: 
… the understanding, when it acts alone, and according to its most general principles, entirely 
subverts itself, and leaves not the lowest degree of evidence in any proposition …  We have … no 
choice left but betwixt a false reason and none at all.  ( T 1.4.7.7) 
(c) The human (or animal) faculty of truth-appreh ension, operating successfully to apprehend truth: 
This sentiment, then, as it is entirely unreasonable, must proceed from some other faculty than the 
understanding.  …  So that upon the whole our reason neither does, nor is it possible it ever shou’d, 
… give us an assurance of the continu’d and distinct existence of body.  ( T 1.4.2.14);  … ’tis a false 
opinion … and consequently … can never arise from reason …  ( T 1.4.2.43) 
(d) What is the case, as successfully apprehe nded by our faculty of truth-apprehension: 
There is nothing I wou’d more willingly lay hold of, than an opportunity of confessing my errors; 
and shou’d esteem such a return to truth and reason to be more honourable than the most unerring 
judgment.  ( T App 1) 
(e) The faculty of truth-apprehension acting entirely  alone, independently of other faculties (such as 
the senses or memory): 
… vice and virtue are not discoverable merely by reason, or the comparison of ideas …  
(T 3.1.2.1);  … the sense of justice is not founded on reason, or on the discovery of certain 
connexions and relations of ideas, which are eternal, immutable, and universally obligatory.  
(T 3.2.2.20) 
What we have here is not a straightforward ambiguity  in “reason”, because the various uses all spring 
from its established meaning in a way that is very  common and can easily be illustrated with other 
words.  For example a “cure” for a disease standardly means an effective remedy, but can also be used 
to refer to a treatment which has been wrongly  thought to be a remedy, as in: “The traditional cure 
turned out to be hindering recovery”.  A fortiori , the word can be applied to a treatment that is claimed  
(but not known) to cure the disease.  And in a so mewhat similar manner, “reason” can be applied to 
processes that aim to apprehend truth, independently of whether they actually succeed, as in (b) above.  
On other occasions, we would restrict each term to treatments or processes that operate correctly , as in 
(c) above: “His so-called remedy wasn’t actually a cure at all”; “Reason cannot lead you to that 
conclusion”.58  Somewhat related to this is the use of a term to refer to the successful outcome  or 
target  of a process, as in (d) above, which involves a common form of metonymy recognised by 
                                                      
58 Just as “reason” is often used to mean good  reason, or reason used appropriately , so when Hume says that there is 
no argument or inference of some kind, he tends to mean no good  argument or inference, e.g. “even after I have had 
experience of many repeated effects of this kind, there is no argument, which determines me to suppose, that the effect will be conformable to past experience” ( A 15); “we have no argument to convince us, that objects, which have, in our 
experience, been frequently conjoined, will likewise, in other instances, be conjoined in the same manner” ( E 12.22, 
cf. E 4.19, 21, 8.23); “if this proposition … affords no inference that affects human life” ( D 227, cf. D 205).  Such 
usage is indeed very common with words for intellectual operations, e.g. “This is a proof that P” or “This is a 
refutation of P” would both be taken to connote successful  proof or refutation, although it is also possible to say “His 
proof that P [or refutation of P] turned out to be flawed”. 
 42 Locke: “T HE Word Reason  in the English  Language … sometimes … is taken for true, and clear 
Principles …” ( Essay  IV xvii 1, see note 19 above). 
 Case (e) is more complex and problematic, pr esupposing some form of distinction between a 
core or paradigmatic notion of “reason” – reason acting by it self independently of the sub-faculties 
which “report” to it – and the more  usual extended notion.  A relative ly straightforward analogy could 
arise in the case of a company that has errors in  its accounts, some of which are due to false 
information received from other parts of the business,  and some of which are due to the accountants 
themselves.  Here “an accounting error” would most  naturally be taken as referring to the latter, 
meaning an error due to the accountants alone, t hough it could also be taken in the broader sense as 
meaning an error (of whatever kind) in the accounts.  Another, more interesting, parallel arises in the 
case of words whose original core meaning has b een extended to encompass an increasing range of 
processes, as for example the word “inqui ry” in the context of an official inquiry  into the preferences 
of citizens in some area.59  Such an inquiry could proceed by various methods (e.g. consulting of 
records and voting statistics), but the paradigmatic method would be direct inquiry : that is, asking the 
citizens, in person, for their view.  Here the core  notion remains firmly tied to the original literal 
meaning, but a contrasting type of case can arise wher e a term is associated with some kind of value, 
for example the words “professiona l” and “amateur”, whose literal me aning concerns whether or not 
someone earns a living from the activity concerned,  but which acquire additional connotations from 
that literal meaning.  Thus “He’s a real professi onal!” can be used to say that someone has the 
paradigmatic qualities of a professional in the relevant  field, while “That’s a really amateur job!” can 
be used to criticise a piece of work  as failing to reach “professional”  standards.  Hence it is quite 
possible to have, without paradox, a professional job done by  an amateur, or vice-versa.  In this sort of 
case, the paradigmatic notion can split ap art from the original literal meaning. 
 “Reason”, as traditionally understood, combines al l of the features necessary to exhibit this 
wide range of variations in usage.  Like a cure, it aims to achieve something – the discovery of truth – 
but can fail.  Like an accounting system, it draws information from a wide range of distinct sources – memory , the senses  etc. – and then applies further processi ng of its own.  Like  an inquiry, it has 
traditionally been thought to have a pa radigm method of operation – the direct perceptual 
apprehension of truth and evidential connexions – bu t can also encompass more indirect methods of 
truth-discovery.  And finally, like a professional, it is understood to involve a ppropriate standards of 
operation – by purely “rational” methods – giving  a sense in which the so-called operations of 
“reason”, even if they happen to succeed in yielding truth, can fail to live up to that name when they 
fall short of the required standards. 
                                                     
 
59 Examples of this phenomenon seem to be most common where our faculties have been extended technologically, for 
example “discussion” (paradigmatically in person, but by extension at long distance, mediated, and over years), “paper” (a printed article, or an electronic resource), “see” (d irect vision, or apprehension by whatever means), “lift” 
(by hand, or using machinery) etc.  43  It is therefore not at all surprising to find that Hume’s uses of “reason” exhibit great variety, 
with a wide range of purposes and nuances.  Such variety does not imply that the word is literally 
ambiguous , any more than it does in the cases of “cur e”, “accounting”, “inquiry”, or “professional”.  
This verbal flexibility is quite different from the so rt of literal ambiguity that arises where a single 
word has been coined more than once – coincidentally – for different purposes. 
6.4  Inconsistent standards? 
The points made above might be sufficient to undermine the common view that Hume’s use of 
“reason” is straightforwardly ambiguous .  But a strong suspicion is likely to remain, that he is guilty of 
applying inconsistent standards  in arguments which supposedly have a similar purpose, namely, to 
deny that reason is responsible for some key mental  operation.  For the case sketched in §6 above has 
not yet been addressed, to the effect that Hume’s famous argument of Treatise  1.3.6 ought to  
disqualify induction from counting amongst the legitimate operations of reason, at least as that faculty 
is understood within his later arguments of Treatise  1.4.2 and 3.1.1.  With the distractions of the 
ambiguity issue put to one side, let us now exam ine this more focused objection in more detail. 
 We have seen that Hume’s famous argument – toge ther with its corollary regarding the role of 
custom – aims to establish that every induc tive inference involves a sub-process which is not reason-
like, that is, non-cognitive , and which operates through an automa tic and irresistible mechanism of 
associative extrapolation rather than by any rational insight or apprehension of reality.  Hume’s own 
words, in his definitive Enquiry  presentation, express this conclusi on and corollary fairly clearly:60 
we … conclude … that, in all reasonings from experience, there is a step taken by the mind, which is 
not supported by any argument or process of the understanding  ( E 5.2) 
All belief of matter of fact or real existence is derived merely from some object, present to the memory 
or senses, and a customary conjunction between that and some other object.  …  This belief is the 
necessary result of placing the mind in such circumstan ces.  It is an operation of the soul, when we are 
so situated, as unavoidable as to feel the passion of  love, when we receive benefits; or hatred, when we 
meet with injuries.  All these opera tions are a species of natural instin cts, which no reasoning or process 
of the thought and understanding is able, either to produce, or to prevent.  ( E 5.8) 
Hume is also clearly aware that this conc lusion has potentially sceptical implications: 
The sceptic … seems to have ample matter of triumph; while he justly insists, that … nothing leads us 
to [inductive] inference but custom or a certain instinct of our nature; which it is indeed difficult to 
resist, but which, like other instincts, may be fallacious and deceitful.  ( E 12.22) 
Indeed he might well seem to be already commit ted to a radically sceptical position, because as we 
have already remarked in §5.2 above, the logic of his procedure implies that an operation which 
depends on even one imagination-like sub-process is to be categorised as founded on the imagination  
rather than reason , even if all the other sub-processes involved are rationally above reproach.  Such an 
                                                      
60 Millican (1995, pp. 113-14 and 2002, pp. 138- 9) argues that the following passage from E 5.2 should indeed be 
taken as the definitive statement of Hume’s conclusion in the Enquiry , on the ground that it reconciles a tension in his 
other statements (at E 4.15 and 4.23). 
 44 asymmetry when speaking of foundational processes is qu ite natural, since we are typically interested 
in the weakest  link in any chain of support rather than the strongest .  Thus a climber can properly be 
described as “supported only by a rope” whether that rope itself is secured to a mountain, a building, a 
heavy vehicle, or any other relatively reliable anchor.61  In the same way, an argument or legal case 
which crucially depends on some im aginative fabrication, even if it also depends on numerous points 
that are logically unassailable, can appropria tely be said to be “founded on fantasy”. 
 But if we follow through this line of thought, then since causal or inductive inference depends 
on a process of imaginative extrapolation which it self has no rational grounding, we seem forced to 
conclude that any proposition which can be established only by such inference must apparently in turn 
be disqualified from counting as found ed on reason.  Yet as we saw in §5.3 and §6, this seems to 
contradict both the text and the spir it of Hume’s later discussions in the Treatise  and the Moral 
Enquiry .62  Must we embrace the ambiguity thesis after all,  if we are to acquit Hume of the charge of 
blatant – and fundamental – double-standards? 
7  Resolving the conundrum 
The key to resolving this problem is, I believe, to  be found in the discussion of §6.2 above, where two 
subtly different issues were distinguished: 
  (a)  whether induction is founded on reason;   (b)  whether induction is to be c ounted as itself an operation of reason. 
Hume’s argument concerning induction gives a clearly  negative answer to (a), while his attitude to 
induction elsewhere (cf. §6 above) strongly suggests a positive answer to (b).  No doubt there is a 
superficial tension between these two answers, but there is no outright contradiction.  I suggest, 
therefore, that Hume views induction as being an operation of  reason, an operation which is not itself 
founded on reason, but arises instead from custom, a process of the imagination . 
7.1  An operation of reason, founded on the imagination? 
One (perhaps surprising) virtue of this resolution is that enables us to reinstate the natural thought that 
Hume generally regards reason  and the imagination  as complementary categories, in the sense that an 
operation deemed to belong to the imagination is thereby excluded – at least within that context and at 
                                                      
61 We would not usually describe the climber as “supported only by” a rock (or vehicle etc.) to which the rope is 
attached unless the rock was considered potentially less secure than the rope (e.g. suppose the attachment is to spur of 
rock that is in imminent danger of cracking – we might well then say that the climber is “supported only by the spur”). 
62 Recall such quotations as “… with regard to reason  …  The only conclusion we can draw from the existence of one 
thing to that of another, is by means of the relation of cause and effect …” ( T 1.4.2.47); “… our reason … or, more 
properly speaking, … those conclusions we form from cause and effect …” ( T 1.4.4.15); “… these emotions extend 
themselves to the causes and effects of that object, as they are pointed out to us by reason and experience …” (T 2.3.3.3); “… the operations of human understanding … [include] the inferring of matter of fact …” ( T 3.1.1.18).  45 that level of explanation  – from counting also as an operation of reason (cf. §6.2).  Superficially, at 
least, this does seem appropriate, because an “i magination-like” process is understood precisely as one 
that involves “blind” associative mechanisms rather than the apprehension of reality.  And although, as 
we have seen, Hume occasionally talks as though reas on and the imagination are mutually compatible 
– for example at T 1.4.7.7 where he refers to “the unders tanding, that is, … the general and more 
establish’d properties of the imagination” – such talk  (if taken literally) seems inconsistent with his 
key arguments that hinge on faculty assignments, where he invariably treats them as mutually 
exclusive.63  Hence we are better interpreting such talk as an inexact expression of something slightly 
more complex: in this case, something like “ operations that are founded on  the general and more 
establish’d properties of the imagination”.  This seems relatively unproblematic, especially given the 
rarity of such statements, and preferable to convicting Hume of inconsistency or ambiguity. 
 There is, however, a price to be paid for all th is, because it evades the line of thought sketched 
in §6.4 above only by implicitly denying the transitivity  of the founding relation in terms of which it 
was posed.  To see this, note first that Hume e xplicitly talks of propositions or beliefs as being founded 
on arguments, inference, or reasoning (e.g. T 1.3.6.4, 1.3.14.35; A 10, 33; E 4.15; D 204), implying 
that beliefs that are established by standard inductive or causal arguments should count as being 
founded on those arguments.  Inductive inference itself is in turn said to be founded on the principles 
of the imagination – customary transfer of vivacity – rather than reason (e.g. T 1.3.9.19, 1.3.14.21, 
1.4.4.1, 1.4.7.3).  But now if the founded on  relation is univocal, one would also expect it be transitive: 
if x is founded on y, and y is founded  on z in the same way , then one would expect x to be founded 
(indirectly) on z .  So if we have beliefs in matters of f act that are founded on induction, and induction 
is founded on the imagination,64 then it seems to fo llow that those beliefs are founded – albeit 
indirectly – on the imagination, and hence not on reason  (assuming the two are mutually exclusive).  
But surely, if induction is itself  an operation of reason, shouldn’t this  mean that anything appropriately 
inferred by induction is indeed ipso facto  founded on reason? 
 One possible – and perhaps not unreasonable – r esponse to this problem would be to give up 
any attempt to find a coherent logic for Hume’s f ounding relation, on the ground that it is simply too 
profligate and undisciplined to be formally tamed (cf. note 43 in §5.2 above).65  We could instead 
                                                      
63 As we saw in §5.2 above, Hume tends to treat any dependence on processes of the imagination as implying entire  
dependence on the imagination – thereby pointedly excluding any foundation in reason.  So if inductive inference were able to count as both an operation of reason and an operation of the imagination, then a conclusion which was founded 
entirely on this operation of reason would nevertheless have to count as dependent on the imagination and therefore not founded on reason, which would in turn undermine the possibility that anything could ever be founded on 
inductive reason.  The upshot of this argument is that if “founded on reason” and “founded on the imagination” are mutually exclusive, then “operation of reason” and “operation of the imagination” must also be mutually exclusive.  
64 Here – as elsewhere in the paper – I follow Hume’s usual practice of ignoring the type/token distinction between 
induction in general and specific inductive inferences .  Fortunately nothing crucial seems to hang on this. 
65 Millican (2002) attempts to develop such a logic, but it seems that he cannot both maintain that “Hume takes 
‘founded on’ to be in general a transitive relation” (p. 147) and also  hold that the “founded on” relation is sufficiently 
univocal and well-defined to be applicable to all different  kinds of foundation and all relevant explanatory levels. 
 46 attempt to identify the many different kinds of “f oundation” that might be relevant to his discussion 
(e.g. material causes, underlying processes, inferenc es, relations, algorithmic steps, rational grounds, 
premises, impressions) and then – armed with this taxonomy – tease apart the threads of his thought so 
as to identify his fundamental principles in less am biguous language.  That would be an interesting 
and potentially illuminating exercise, though I suspect that it would misrepresent Hume’s thought precisely in failing to conflate  these different kinds of foundation.  Millican (2007, p. 182; cf. 2002, 
pp. 146-51) has shown how efficiently Hume’s argument in the Enquiry  can be rendered into eleven 
principal stages, all of which are expressed in terms of a single “founded on” relation, and it seems 
hard to deny that Hume was thinking in some such terms when arguing like this: 
When it is asked, What is the nature of all our reasonings concerning matter of fact?   the proper answer 
seems to be, that they are founded on the relati on of cause and effect.  When again it is asked, What is 
the foundation of all our reasonings and conclusions concerning that relation?   it may be replied in one 
word, E XPERIENCE .  But if we still carry on our sifting humour, and ask, What is the foundation of all 
conclusions from experience?   …  ( E 4.14) 
Clearly cause and effect , experience , and custom  (the obvious answer to Hume’s final question) all fall 
into distinct logical categories, yet he seems to assume complacently that the foundational relation can 
slide unproblematically from one to the other.  Pe rhaps this is illegitimate, but his reasoning looks 
plausible and at least sets an interesting challenge: to attempt to make sense of it in terms that are 
maximally faithful to his ow n categories and conflations. 
 With this in mind, the regimentation of Hu me’s reasoning is greatly simplified if – when 
specifying the relata of the “founded on” re lation – we parse his word “experience” as reasoning from 
experience , and “the relation of cause and effect” as causal reasoning .66  If we do this, then the only 
part of Hume’s discussion that resists such translati on into broadly informational terms is what he says 
about custom .  And it is in respect of custom, of cour se, that we encountered the difficulty over 
transitivity that beset our attempted solution of the double-standards conundrum.  A tempting way out, 
therefore, is to abandon the idea that Hume’s “founded on” relation is univocal, and to interpret 
foundation on custom  in particular as a different  foundational relation, one that is to be understood in 
purely causal as opposed to informational terms. 
7.2  An operation of reason, caused by  imagination-like processes 
Here are the passages from the Treatise  in which Hume talks about custom (or the principles of the 
imagination) as providing a foundation  for inductive inference: 
                                                      
66 Here I follow the lead of Millican (2007, p. 182), who make s the adaptation without discussion.  However it could 
be challenged as misrepresenting Hume’s thought: for example, founding an inference on reasoning from experience  is 
not self-evidently the same as founding it on information derived from experience .  Nevertheless, the simplification is 
helpful for current purposes, and can perhaps plausibly be seen as smoothing over conflations that Hume himself makes.  Altogether Millican lists eight relata of the “founded on” relation: causal reasoning , demonstrative inference , 
reasoning from experience , factual inference to the unobserved , intuition , reason , sensation , and the Uniformity 
Principle .  But within his representation of the argument he replaces “intuition” and “sensation” by “intuitive 
evidence” and “sensory evidence” respectively.  47 “… education … [is] built almost on the same foundation of custom and repetition as our experience or 
reasonings from causes and effects” ( T 1.3.9.19); “… tho’ custom be the foundation of all our 
judgments …” ( T 1.3.13.9);  “The foundation of our inference is the transition arising from the 
accustom’d union.” ( T 1.3.14.21);  “… the principles [in the imagination] which are permanent, 
irresistable, and universal; such as the customary transition from causes to effects, and from effects to 
causes: … are the foundation of all our thoughts and actions …” ( T 1.4.4.1);  “The memory, senses, and 
understanding are … all of them founded on the imagination, or the vivacity of our ideas” ( T 1.4.7.3). 
But what is really striking is that we do not find any such passages at all  in the Abstract  or Enquiry : in 
neither of these works is cust om ever said to provide a foundation  for inductive inference, and in both 
works the influence of custom is always descr ibed in terms that are either explicitly causal , or 
naturally interpretable as such.  Here, fi rst, are the relevant passages from the Abstract : 
“We are determined by CUSTOM  alone to suppose the future conformable to the past.” ( A 15);  
“… custom … alone determines the mind, in all instances, to suppose the future conformable to the 
past” ( A 16);  “We can give no reason for extending to the future our experience in the past; but are 
entirely determined by custom …  Be lief, therefore, in all matters of fact arises only from custom …” 
(A 21);  “… even after we have experience of th ese effects, ’tis custom alone, not reason, which 
determines us to make it the standard of our future judgments” ( A 25). 
And from the Enquiry : 
“There is some other principle, which determines him to form such a conclusion.  This principle is 
CUSTOM  or H ABIT.” (E 5.4-5);  “… we are determined by custom alone to expect the one from the 
appearance of the other …  All inferences from expe rience, therefore, are e ffects of custom, not of 
reasoning.” ( E 5.5);  “… the mind is carried by custom …” ( E 5.8);  “… [the object] immediately, by 
the force of custom, carries the imag ination to conceive that object, which is usually conjoined to it …” 
(E 5.11);  “This transition of thought from the cause to the effect proceeds not from reason.  It derives 
its origin altogether from custom and experience.” ( E 5.20);  “… our thoughts and conceptions have 
still, we find, gone on in the same train with the ot her works of nature.  Custom is that principle, by 
which this correspondence has been effected …” ( E 5.21);  “Being determined by custom to transfer the 
past to the future …” ( E 6.4);  “The appearance of a cause al ways conveys the mind, by a customary 
transition, to the idea of the effect.” ( E 7.29);  “… the mind is determined by custom to infer the one 
from the appearance of the other” ( E 8.5);  “… the mind is carried, by a customary transition , from the 
appearance of one to the belief of the other” ( E 8.21);  “It is custom alone, which engages animals, from 
every object, that strikes their senses, to infer its usual attendant …” ( E 9.5);  “… all reasoning 
concerning facts or causes is derived merely from custom …” ( E 9.5 n. 20);  “… nothing leads us to this 
inference but custom or a certain instinct of our nature …” ( E 12.22). 
Taking the Abstract  and the Enquiry  together, that makes 19 causal  statements implicating custom, 
and not a single foundational  statement!  (Nor are there any foundational statements implicating either 
the imagination or the principles of the imaginati on.)  But this is not because Hume’s use of the 
foundational metaphor has declined in general: on the contrary, he say s that induction is “founded” on 
the relation of cause and effect, or experience, or the Uniformity Principle – and that it is not 
“founded” on reasoning, argument, or  any process of the understanding – significantly more  in the 
Enquiry  than he does in the Treatise .67  All this very strongly suggests that Hume himself came to 
recognise a firm distinction between what in the Enquiry he calls a foundation, and what he there calls 
a determining cause.  Thus understood, it is clear that custom  counts only as a cause , but the various 
informational relata are treated as (potential) foundations . 
                                                      
67 The overall count is 7 instances in the Enquiry  to 3 in the Treatise ; see note 43 in §5.2 above for details. 
 48  There is a crucial asymmetry here, because it seems that a rational “foundation” can also be a 
determining cause, and Hume in the Enquiry  does indeed treat processes of reasoning  as potential 
causes as well as foundations.  This marks a notable transition in his language, for in the Treatise  he 
never  speaks of a “process” of thought  or reasoning, whereas in the Enquiry  he never  talks of reason 
itself as a cause.68  (So we find nothing like the striking statement in Treatise  1.4.1.1 that “Our reason 
must be consider’d as a kind of cause, of which truth is the natural effect”.69)  This change from 
speaking of reason itself  as a determining cause (e.g. T 1.3.6.4, 1.3.6.12, 1.3.7.6) to a focus instead on 
reasoning processes  brings Hume’s expression broadly into li ne with his practice in regard to the 
imagination (see note 43 in §5.2 above), confirming that it is systematic rather than accidental. 
 If reasoning processes can serve as both foundation and cause, whereas custom can be only a 
cause, then this opens the possibility of posing c oherent but unanswerable questions, like that which 
introduces Hume’s discussion in Part 2 of Enquiry  Section 4: 
… if we still carry on our sifting humour, and ask, What is the foundation of all conclusions concerning 
from experience?   this implies a new question …  ( E 4.14) 
In §7.1 above, I suggested that custom  was the obvious answer to this question, but it now seems not 
to be so.  Nor is there any other positive answer  to be had, because Hume’s conclusion that “All 
inferences from experience … are effects of custom, not of reasoning” ( E 5.5) apparently rules out the 
sort of causation that could provide – at the same time – a foundation .  Thus in competing successfully 
for the causal explanatory role, custom effectiv ely excludes anything else from the foundational role 
which it itself is unable to fulfil.  Perhaps, then, th ere is hidden depth in Hume’s declaration of intent: 
“I shall content myself, in this section, with an easy task, and shall pretend only to give a negative 
answer to the question here proposed” ( E 4.15). 
                                                      
68 Here are all the relevant causal passages.  At E 5.4, we find someone “determined to draw” an inference, though 
“convinced, that his understanding has no part in the operation”; “some other principle … determines him”.  Then at E 5.5 “we are determined by custom alone” to make the in ference after observing repeated instances, and “Reason is 
incapable of any such variation [in response to repetition]”.  The terms at E 5.20 are not unambiguously causal: “This 
transition of thought … proceeds not from reason.  It derives its origin altogether from custom and experience.”  Hume 
is far more comfortable applying causal terms to processes  of reason, rather than to reason itself.  At E 4.23, he denies 
that a child is “led into [an assumption of uniformity] by any process of argument or ratiocination”, concluding that “it is not reasoning which engages us to suppose the past resembling the future”.  At E 5.2 the mind is “not engaged by 
argument to make this step”, and at E 5.4 it is not “by any process of reasoning, he is engaged to draw this inference”.  
At E 5.5, Hume implies that induction takes place “without being impelled by any reasoning or process of the 
understanding”, and concludes “All inferences from experience, therefore, are effects of custom, not of reasoning.”  
Meanwhile note 8 to E 5.5 talks of “arguments, which … are supposed to be the mere effects of reasoning and 
reflection”.   At E 9.6,  he says that “the experimental reasoning … which we possess in common with beasts, and on 
which the whole conduct of life depends, is nothing but a species of instinct or mechanical power, that acts in us unknown to ourselves”.  Finally, at E 11.28, he discusses people’s fallacious reasoning, suggesting that “Whether this 
reasoning of theirs be just or not, is no matter.  Its in fluence on their life and conduct must still be the same.” 
69 Allison (2008, pp. 128-9) emphasises this statement, insisting that the causal and foundational locutions are 
“extensionally equivalent, since whatever is ‘determin’d by’ reason is ‘founded on’ it and vice versa”.  He goes on, “I find it more plausible to let the causal reading ‘wear the trousers’; otherwise we would either have to accuse Hume of being deeply confused about a fundamental point of his philosophy in the Treatise  or see him as changing his mind 
about this point in the Enquiry .”  He then alludes in a footnote to the results of a “computer search of the Treatise  and 
the Enquiry ” which he undertook to back up his claim of extensional equivalence.  No results of this are shown, but I 
hope he would agree that the evidence provided here is indicative that “more Curiosity & Research gives a direct opposite Turn from the same Principles” ( HL i 152).  49  The upshot of all this is that “if we still carry on our sifting humour” in the search for ultimate 
foundations, we hit rock bottom with something that has a cause , but no foundation .  And that 
something is the tendency, rooted in our animal na ture, to infer from past to  future, from experienced 
to not-yet-experienced.  Importantly, however, its status of being caused  by “principles of the 
imagination” does not iterate up the transitive chain to  infect our individual inductive inferences in the 
way that “founded on the imagination” threatened to do in §7.1.  Inductive in ferences (at least those 
that are “respectable”) remain founded  on reason – because induction counts as an operation  of reason 
– even though induction itself has no foundation, but only a cause  in imagination-like processes. 
 This section has attempted to ou tline a coherent position, based s quarely on Hume’s texts, that 
can make good sense of his foundational metaphor and th e way it functions within his argument.  We 
started from the observation that foundation on custom  seemed anomalous, prompting the idea that 
two sorts of foundation would be needed to provide a coherent account.  This was then very strongly 
corroborated by Hume’s texts, which clearly indicat ed a growing appreciation on his part that such a 
distinction (between “rational” foundation and “mecha nical” causation) was required.  The result is a 
plausible – and I think plausibly Humean – positio n, which appears to evade the ambiguities, double-
standards, and inconsistencies that previously thr eatened us, though of course much more work would 
be needed to complete this account, spelling out th e nature of the foundationa l relation on which it is 
based and so forth.  However a more immediate worry might seem to be obvious: can we really suppose that Hume would consider a process rational  which rests on a purely mechanical  basis? 
 To answer this worry, suppose that Hume were to take the alternative view, that any rational 
process must have a rational foundation.  It would then immediately follow that for anything to be 
founded on reason, it must be founded on reason “all the way down” (i.e. it would have to be solidly 
founded on evidence or principles, which are either  immediately apprehended by reason, or else 
themselves solidly founded on evidence or principl es which are either immediately apprehended by 
reason or …, etc.).  Hume would thus be committed to a strongly rationalistic notion of reason, whose 
demands would be impossible to fulfil without aba ndoning the heart of his philosophy.  At no point 
would he be able to halt the f oundational regress by acknowledging that  ultimately the principles of 
our reason can (legitimately) be founded on basic ps ychological mechanisms.  So the only possible 
outcomes would be either extreme rationalism or incurable scepticism.  Some interpreters have indeed 
seen Hume as impelled towards radical scepticism by precisely this kind of regressive train of 
thought.
70  But it would be completely at odds with his efforts to ground a conception of reason on the 
contingent operations of the human mind, and in pa rticular, flatly incompatible with treating induction 
as genuine operation of reason. 
                                                      
70 Both Stroud (1977, pp. 60-2) and Kenyon (1985, pp. 255-7) attribute this to Hume in the context of his argument 
concerning induction, but neither justifies the attribution textually, and there is no evidence of it in either Treatise  1.3.6 
or Enquiry  4.  The nearest Hume comes to it is when he highlights the circularity of founding the Uniformity Principle 
on inductive inference, but this is a very specific circularit y, and quite different from a universal regress of reasons. 
 50 7.3  Antecedent and consequent scepticism 
Thus Hume’s general approach to the foundation of induction is, it seems, the only option available for 
anyone but an extreme rationalist.  Reason must ultimately be grounded in basic human capacities 
which cannot possibly be rationally founded “all the way down”.  This  impossibility, indeed, is so 
clear that to treat our faculties as untrustworthy until they have been given such a thoroughgoing 
rational foundation is to make a massively unreasonable demand: 
There is a species of scepticism, antecedent  to all study and philosophy, which is much inculcated by 
DES CARTES  and others …  It recommends an universal doubt … of our very faculties; of whose 
veracity, say they, we must assure ourselves, by  a chain of reasoning, deduced from some original 
principle, which cannot possibly be fallacious and deceitful.  But neither is there any such original 
principle, which has a prerogative above others, that are self-evident and convincing:  Or if there were, 
could we advance a step beyond it, but by the use of those very faculties, of which we are supposed to 
be already diffident.  The C ARTESIAN  doubt, therefore, were it ever possible to be attained by any 
human creature (as it plainly is not) would be entirely in curable; and no reasoning could ever bring us to 
a state of assurance and conviction upon any subject.  ( E 12.3) 
Here, in Hume’s mature and most explicit discussion of the significance of scepticism, he appears to 
be saying that we should start by ascribing default authority to our faculties,71 at least until some 
weakness in them has emerged “ consequent  to science and enquiry” ( E 12.5).  A few pages later, 
during his exploration of the various types of c onsequent scepticism, he goes on to outline his own 
famous argument from Enquiry  4, in the sceptical tones that we saw in §6.4 above: 
nothing leads us to [inductive] inference but custom or a certain instinct of our nature; which it is indeed 
difficult to resist, but which, like other instincts, may be fallacious and deceitful.  ( E 12.22) 
But he does not in the least suggest that these reflect ions should lead us to give up induction, and his 
response is rather to challenge the sceptic by asking: 
What his meaning is?  And what he proposes by all these curious researches?  …  a P YRRHONIAN  
cannot expect, that his philosophy will have any constant influence on the mind:  Or if it had, that its influence would be beneficial to society.  On the contrary, he must acknowledge, if he will 
acknowledge any thing, that all human life must perish , were his principles universally and steadily to 
prevail.  …  It is true; so fatal an event is very little to be dreaded.  Nature is always too strong for 
principle.  …  all [the sceptic’s] objections … can have no other tendency than to show the whimsical 
condition of mankind, who must act and reason and believe; though they are not able, by their most 
diligent enquiry, to satisfy themselves concerning the foundation of these operations, or to remove the objections, which can be raised against them.  ( E 12.23) 
Our epistemic condition is thoroughly “whimsical”, fo r we are irresistibly reliant on faculties that we 
are unable to defend against sceptical objections which, although they “admit of no answer” , yet 
“produce no conviction ” (E 12.15 n. 32).72 
                                                      
71 Here I am indebted to Garrett (1998), pp. 186-7, who insightfully draws attention to the relevance of Hume’s 
discussion of antecedent scepticism to this issue of default authority.  Winkler (1999) also provides interesting  observations on the links between Enquiry  Sections 4 and 12. 
72 Much of the literature on Hume is marred by a focus – sometimes verging on fixation – with the crude question of 
whether he is or is not a “sceptic” about induction, and such literature often makes equally crude assumptions about what a “sceptical” view must entail (e.g. a complete rejection of induction).  But the clear message of his mature treatment of the subject is that such a question is likely to have no simple answer: we have first to ask “What is meant 
by a sceptic?” ( E 12.2), and to expect a nuanced reply.  In some respects, Hume’s attitude to induction is sceptical (e.g. 
relative to previous views about its cognitive basis); in others , it is not (e.g. he insists that we should – and necessarily  51  It is important to notice, however, that the sceptic’s “ philosophical  objections” ( E 12.22) 
against induction are relatively easy to tolerate co mplacently, for there is nothing in them – once we 
have appreciated the unreasonableness of excessive an tecedent scepticism – to motivate us to abandon 
induction, even were we able to do so .  These “objections” reveal our dependence on an unsupported 
assumption of uniformity, but why should that upset us?  Given the impossibility of pure rational insight into the nature of things,
73 we have to begin by taking for granted some  empirical assumption if 
we are to be able to draw any conclusions at al l beyond our memory and senses, and in that case, the 
Uniformity Principle seems as good as any: 
… this conformity betwixt the future and the past … is a point, which can admit of no proof at all, and 
which we take for granted without any proof.  ( A 14) 
Moreover induction has proved invalu able through all our previous  experience, which admittedly 
“proves not, that, for the future, it will continue so” ( E 4.21), but at least vindicates it as reflexively 
self-consistent.  In the light of this remarkable , though inexplicable, a pparent “pre-established 
harmony between the course of nature and the succession of our ideas” ( E 5.21), it is hard to see how 
induction could be better  supported than it is.  So Hume’s cal m reaction to the sceptic seems entirely 
appropriate, in pointing out the futility of his “objections” as anything more than philosophical 
curiosities.  Even if we fully accept them, the “sceptical” arguments yield no good reason – either 
pragmatic or theoretical – for giving up on indu ction, nor even for excluding it from the honorific 
category of reason .74 
8  The context and significance of Hume’s investigation 
We started by surveying a wide range of interpre tations of Hume’s famous argument concerning 
induction, noting that the key question they raised was his use of the puzzling faculty term, reason .  
This set us off on a general investigation of his faculty language (and that of his contemporaries) 
which – after detours through various of his other philosophical positions – has finally brought us back 
to the famous argument and its potential sceptical imp lications.  There is still much more that could be 
discussed here, for example regardin g the grounds and adequacy of the Enquiry ’s riposte to the 
                                                                                                                                                                      
do – rely on it to reach conclusions about matter of fact).  In the Dialogues , he remarks dismissively that simplistic 
questions regarding “the degrees of doubt and assurance, which we ought to indulge with regard to all reasoning … are commonly at the bottom, verbal, and admit not of any precise determination.  …  the sceptic, from habit, caprice, or inclination, insists most on the difficulties; the dogmatist, for like reasons, on the necessity.” ( D 219 n.). 
73 Including, at least in Hume’s view (but less obviously), pure rational insight into probabilistic  relations.  
74 It is an interesting, if unanswerable, question where Hume would ultimately have placed induction within his faculty 
structure if his investigation of its basis, instead of pr oving so amenable to the complacent mitigated scepticism of 
Enquiry  12, had cast serious  (even practical ) sceptical doubt on its fitness for truth-discovery.  Perhaps consideration 
of his more radical sceptical arguments in the Treatise  (notably 1.4.1 and 1.4.2) can provide some basis for informed 
speculation about this (dubiously coherent) question.  But as  things stand, it seems clear that his famous argument 
concerning induction is primarily intended to analyse the sub-cognitive processes that underlie an acknowledged 
“operation of the understanding” – as in the title of Enquiry  4 – rather than to raise the question of whether induction 
deserves that honorific classification in the first place.  This does not imply, however, that all “probable reasoning” 
will qualify for the honour, as Treatise  1.3.13 – on “unphilosophical probability” – makes clear.  In judging whether 
unphilosophical  inductions count as genuine operations of reason , we enter the ambiguous (or at least nuanced) 
territory of §6.3 above, but for the purposes of Hume’s ke y epistemological discussions, they presumably do not. 
 52 sceptic, its relation to the various discussions in the earlier Treatise ,75 and how far it can take us 
towards grounding a distinction between resp ectable scientific inference and irrationality.76  But these 
issues must wait for another occasion, and I shall end with a brief reflective overview of Hume’s 
philosophy of induction, highli ghting some remaining issues and giving a mildly speculative 
reconstruction of how Hume came to this position, helped or hindered by the language of faculties.  
This will also enable an appreciation of the huge significance of his assault on the perceptual ideal of 
reason, by which he anticipated contemporary de velopments in cognitive science by 200 years. 
 Hume’s central philosophical achievement wa s to undermine the dominant view of human 
nature as fundamentally – or at least ideally – rational , our pre-eminent faculty being conceived in 
terms of a transparent perception  of truth.  This view dated back to the ancients, but the Enlightenment 
revolution had only embedded it deeper within the general philosophical consciousness.  In a world 
invigorated by the dazzling triumphs of reason achie ved by Galileo, Descartes, Newton, and others, it 
was only natural to take their methods as the ideals to follow.  But understanding of such methods remained limited by the perceptu al ideal, which accommodated re latively comfortably the thought-
experiments of Galileo or the geometrical mathemat ics of Descartes and Newton, but came up short 
when applied to the probabilistic experimentalism of  the new science.  Desc artes and his successors 
(including Arnauld and Malebranche) ignored th e problem, meanwhile fostering an explosion of 
rationalism which inspired philosophers across Eur ope to seek deep understanding of the universe, 
rendering its principles at least “intelligible” if not  a priori.  But Locke – whose empiricist temper, 
medical experience, and friendship with Boyle pr esumably made the uncertainties of experimental 
science impossible to ignore – attempted to incorp orate “probable reasoning” into his perceptual 
model of human thought, with the unconvincing results we saw earlier (in §3.1 and §3.4). 
 Leibniz came to these issues from a different di rection, with a particular interest in legal 
reasoning and testimony (of which traces seem to be detectable in Hume’s discussion of miracles).  In 
his Theodicy , which Hume owned, Leibniz lamented the general dearth of pr obabilistic understanding, 
but he did little to remedy it.  Hume read both Locke and Leibniz, and took the hint: 
The celebrated Monsieur Leibniz  has observed it to be a defect in the common systems of logic, that 
they are very copious when they explain the operations of the understanding in the forming of 
demonstrations, but are too concise when they treat  of probabilities, and those other measures of 
evidence on which life and action entirely depend …  In this censure, he comprehends the Essay on 
human understanding , Le Recherche de la verité , and L’Art de penser .  The author of the Treatise of 
human nature  seems to have been sensible of this defect in these philosophers, and has endeavoured, as 
much as he can, to supply it.  ( A 4) 
Not content with Locke’s vague hand-waving about  supposed perceivable probable connexions, Hume 
                                                      
75 Hume’s endorsement of induction in the Treatise  has been attributed to considerat ions of naturalness and efficiency 
(Winters 1981), successful reflexivity (Baier, 1991, pp. 99-100) , common-life reinforcement in response to scepticism 
(Falkenstein 1997, pp. 54-9), and various forms of externalism (Loeb 2006, pp. 333-6). 
76 Millican (1995, pp. 133-5; 2002, pp. 164-6) suggests that in the Enquiry  Hume’s defence of induction is implicitly 
elevated – through his discussions of liberty and necessity, analogy, miracles and the Design Argument – into a general vindication of science against superstition, on the basis of what he calls “methodological consistency”.  53 set out to reveal how human probabl e inference actually works, quickly focusing on the key relation of 
causation and then going on to analyse in detail the ideas and mental processes involved.  His 
surprising conclusion was that perceivable  connexions play no role whatever, and so far from probable 
inference’s being based on any rational understanding  of the ideas and relations involved, it instead 
turns out that the inference is  conceptually prior even to  the idea of causation itself: 
Perhaps ’twill appear in the end, that the necessary connexion depends on the inference, instead of the 
inference’s depending on the necessary connexion.  ( T 1.3.6.3) 
Thus probable inference is removed from the supposed domain of rational perception  or intellectual 
insight , and relocated into the domain of instinctiv e animal behaviour.  Human reasoning – except 
within the limited realm of mathematics – is rele gated to dependence on associative mechanisms: the 
humble, earthy motions of the “animal spirits” th at Locke had castigated as a source of “Madness”.77   
 These startling results of Hume’s “chief argument” may be the crowning achievement of his 
philosophy, but he combined this investigation with  a wide range of other enquiries, some of which 
fed into his analyses of causation and probable reasoning.  Most urgently, he needed a taxonomy of the mind’s contents – ideas, impressions, relations a nd so forth – in order to categorise their types, 
sources and mechanisms.  All this naturally invite d expression in the standard language of faculties, 
which usefully provided him with a fairly systema tic framework for orientating his investigation.  
When he came to present his conclusions, however , the faculty language which had initially seemed so 
helpful began to get in the way.  Perhaps the funda mental problem here was that Hume’s faculty terms 
gave a categorisation of types of process that he applied both at the level of manifest mental function 
(such as probable inference, visual perception, or moral judgement), and also  at the explanatory, sub-
cognitive level.  This was a recipe for confusion in  at least four ways.  First, because the description 
most appropriate to a manifest function – de fined in terms of what the mental operation achieves  – can 
be far less suitable as the description of an underlying process .  Secondly, because the various faculty 
terms differ greatly in just this respect – with reason , for example, being primarily functional, whereas 
the principles of the imagination  are essentially mechanical – though Hume treats both as rival sources 
of explanation at the same level.  Thirdly, because a single manifest operation can result from a 
combination of heterogeneous sub-processes, wher eas Hume – intent on subverting the traditional 
picture of rational human nature – tends to fo cus on the simplistic question of whether or not reason  
(as opposed to the imagination ) is adequate to the task.  Fi nally, because once Hume has thus 
identified what he sees as the principal underlyi ng faculty, some linguistic indeterminacy (or even 
confusion) is automatically generated in precisely those interesting cases where the manifest operation 
belongs to a different faculty.  So in particular the imagination  starts off referring to the activity of 
                                                     
 
77 See Essay  II xxxiii 3-4 for Locke’s references to “madness”, cf . §4.3 above.  He goes on to describe custom’s 
operation as follows: “Custom settles habits of Thinking in th e Understanding, as well as of Determining in the Will, 
and of Motions in the Body; all which seems to be but Trains of Motion in the Animal Spirits, which once set a going continue on in the same steps they have been used to, which by often treading are worn into a smooth path, and the Motion in it becomes easy and as it were Natural.” ( Essay  II xxxiii 6).  The nearest Humean equivalent is at T 1.2.5.20. 
 54 overt “imaginative” thinking – such as the arbitrary combination or associational flow of conscious 
ideas – but is later identified as the underl ying mechanism of probable inference.  Reason , meanwhile, 
starts off being understood as refe rring to operations that involve a pprehension of truth in a broadly 
traditional manner, but then acquires quite different connotations after one of these key operations is 
revealed as working quite differently, through processes that are categorised as belonging to a rival – 
and strongly contrasting – faculty.  It is no w onder that Hume, like so many of his interpreters, 
sometimes evinces confusion of the faculties! 
 To cut through this confusion we have had to  be far more explicit than Hume himself about 
the distinction between levels of e xplanation and the role of the faculty  terms.  Our reward has been to 
discover that the confusion in Hume’s texts is mainly  at the level of presentation, and that the theory 
behind it is generally clear and c oherent.  He does not violate his own (and Locke’s) strictures by 
taking faculties to be agents, and his entire theory, though expressed in terms of faculties, can equally 
well be parsed in terms of mental functions and underlying processes.  Understood in this way, reason  
stands proxy for cognitive  operations – those that give epistemic access to what is the case, to truth 
and evidential relations – and Hume appears to start from entirely conventional assumptions about 
what these are, namely: memory , sensation , reflection , intuition , demonstration , and induction .  
However he does not rule out a priori that there could be other forms of cognitively respectable 
process.  Though he “cannot imagine any such r easoning”, he declares himself “still open to 
instruction, if any one will vouchsafe to bestow it on me” ( E 4.20). 
 Hume’s willingness to grant default authority to our natural faculties, and to respect induction 
even after its source is revealed as a humble an imal instinct, would today strongly suggest an 
externalist  perspective, in which epistemic authority is grounded on the objective reliability of our 
faculties rather than our ability to justify them.  But though Hume is undoubtedly a pioneer in that 
direction, there are clear signs in his discussions – both of scepticism in general, and of induction in 
particular – that he himself did not cross the bound ary.  Here one pertinent (but so far I believe 
neglected) question is why, within the famous argument, he treats inferential circularity as 
immediately ruled out, preventing the Uniformity Pr inciple from being “founded” on induction.  This 
prohibition, though entirely understandable on the tr aditional view of reason, should not perhaps be 
quite such an obvious matter as far as Hume himsel f is concerned, and his taking it for granted may 
betray an implicit (though contextually unsurprising)  internalist prejudice.  For if induction were to 
qualify as cognitive – as a genuine operation of reason  – on purely externalist grounds (e.g. based on 
the fact that the world is such as to render induction reliable from a “God’s eye” point of view), then it 
is no longer so clear why an inductive argument fo r the Uniformity Principle could not count as a 
legitimate foundation in reason, at least as far as the individual reasoner is concerned.  The fact that 
induction implicitly presupposes the Principle – in the sense that any inductive argument by its very 
nature takes the past as evidence fo r the future – would then be irrelevant to the question of whether 
induction qualifies as an operation of reason.  So w hy, in that case, should induction not be used to 
provide a foundation in (externalist) reason for the Uniformity Principle?  At least there would be  55 plenty more to be said here, and the fact that Hu me sees no need even to discuss the issue tends to 
confirm that he is operating with an in ternalist concept of rational evidence. 
 A modern-day Hume would probably wish to ta ke the externalist alternative very seriously, 
but internalist assumptions were only to be exp ected in a world dominated for so long by a perceptual  
understanding of reason, and it was to be another 250  years before such assumptions would start to be 
widely challenged.  Hume’s famous argument – had it been viewed sympathetically as a powerful 
contribution to cognitive understanding instead of an abhorrent sceptical threat – might well have 
prompted such a challenge.  For it picks on the standa rd cognitive operation which is least amenable to 
being understood as functioning perceptually (despite  Locke’s efforts), and proves that it cannot be 
given any plausible perceptual grounding.  Induction ’s crucial presupposition, that the past provides 
evidence about the future, cannot be founded on anythi ng that we perceive through the senses, nor can 
it be intuited or demonstrated by rational insight from anything that our past experience – either 
sensory or intellectual – has revealed.  This leav es only induction itself as a possible ground, but as we 
have seen, this is ruled out as viciously circular. 
 Hume’s conclusion, that induction cannot be  founded on reason, has two aspects which are 
somewhat mixed together by his multi-level, multi- purpose faculty language.  And his procedure of 
seeking a causal foundation in the imagination only after  reason has been dismissed strongly indicates 
a presumption that a rational foundation  for induction – a grounding in apprehended truth and 
evidence – would at the same time provide a causal explanation  for it.  In fact the two issues are 
potentially distinct, and a non-perceptual  foundation in reason could still leave the causal question 
open.78  Our imagined modern-day exte rnalist Hume, for example, might insist that induction counts 
as a legitimate operation of reason on the basis of it s reliability, but he would still be faced with the 
question of how induction operates.  So one could envisage an entirely non-sceptical contemporary 
version of Hume’s argument, focusing only on the causal question and without any epistemologically-
coloured reference to faculties at all.  The ques tion would simply concern how inductive inference 
works, and the answer would be that, since it cannot operate by means of perceived reasons , it must 
operate in some other way, with customar y association of ideas as the obvious candidate.79  Such an 
                                                      
78 In other contexts Hume must presumably have been aware of this, for his recognition of induction as a legitimate 
operation of reason implies that anything proved by inductive inference will have a grounding in reason, without 
thereby prejudging the causal basis of such inference.  (It is also worth noting that the first paragraph of The Natural 
History of Religion  draws just this distinction, for different reasons.)  But the point made here does not anyway amount 
to a serious objection to Hume’s argument, because his procedure makes good sense in ad hominem terms: the position that he is targeting claims that inductive inference is both founded on, and causally explained by, the grasp of reasons. 
79 I take it that something like this thought lies be hind the Garrett and Owen interpretations, though Garrett (1997) 
focuses on what causes us to engage in induction, rather than how it operates (his 1998 and 2001 get closer to Owen’s view).  However the cases are not parallel when “stepwise inference” is substituted for “perceived reasons”, partly because stepwise inference is a potential candidate description of what induction is rather than a would-be causal basis.  
If on the other hand induction is not  taken to be a form of stepwise inference, then the supposed Humean argument – in 
asking whether the Uniformity Principle can be founded on induction – would not be asking whether it can be founded on stepwise inference.  Owen evades the horns of this dilemma by viewing Hume’s “reason” as literally and self-consciously ambiguous (1999, pp. 132-3); Garrett attempts to do so by focusing specifically on the Uniformity Principle, that is, the gap between past and future, as th e step that has to be bridged (1998, pp. 183-4; 2001, p. 209). 
 56 argument need not in any way confuse epistemo logical with causal questions, despite making 
reference to perceived reasons, because perceptual  reasons are distinctive precisely in merging these 
questions together: to perceive that P is true  is at the same time to be given both a cognitive grasp of P 
and also  a causal mechanism for acquiring belief in P. 
 Perceptual reasons also merge together tw o separable aspects of a “causal mechanism”, two 
different levels of explanation which are easy to conflate when we discuss how a method of inference 
operates.  One of these is the algorithmic  question, concerning the informational steps (if any) that 
constitute such inference, and the other is the substantial  question: what physical or other processes 
bring it about that the algorithmic steps are followed?   These issues have only come into focus since 
Turing, because fully separating the various thr eads requires a notion of algorithm that does not 
depend on consciously represented in formation.  Perception, as traditionally understood in its role as 
the motor of rational inference, is pa radigmatically non-algorithmic (cf. T 1.3.2.2), purporting to 
account for the acquisition of certain (immediately pe rceptual) beliefs by what is supposed to be a 
causally explanatory process of direct apprehension .  By its very nature this seems to resist any further 
decomposition, either causal or algorithmic, and it is hard to understand how, if at all, such direct 
perception – which appears to be almost magical fr om this perspective – can be possible even in 
principle.  Again, these issues have come in to much sharper focus through the post-Turing 
development of cognitive science, with systematic attempts to implement automated vision systems 
which have resulted in fascinating discoveries about  the conceptual steps involved in perceptual 
achievements such as object recognition.  It turns out  that what is experienced phenomenologically as 
“direct” perception or apprehension is very far from being as immediate as it seems, not only  because 
of the obvious role of physical causal intermedia ries (such as light rays, lens, retina, nerves etc.) but 
also because it involves complex algorithmic processes  – edge detection and so forth – which are 
completely unconscious.  Thus conscious awareness is revealed as a hopelessly inadequate guide to 
what is really going on in our minds, even in respect of information processing .  By contrast, 
conceptual analysis of the processing involved – the sa me sort of thing that Hume was up to but today, 
of course, wonderfully assisted by “experimentation”  using powerful computer models – sometimes 
proves to be far more informative.80  
                                                      
80 Such experimentation is an interesting mix of Humean categories, and represents a novel methodology beyond his 
imagination, in degree if not in kind.  The outcome of comple x computer algorithms is, in a sense, a priori, because the 
results that they generate could “in principle” be worked out through calculation, but their huge complexities (and inconceivably large search spaces, especially when the processes are partly stochastic in nature) often make empirical trial the only feasible means of investigation.  Meanwhile, analysis of how animals and humans achieve certain forms of information processing – the solutions discovered by evolution – can provide an invaluable guide for our limited imagination, even where the solutions could “in principle” be revealed by a priori analysis.  As Hume was well aware, 
the brutal fact is that unassisted human reason is pathetically weak and prone to error even in the demonstrative sciences (cf. T 1.4.1), but he could not foresee that an automated solution to this might become available, which 
fundamentally expands the potential for combining empirical with conceptual investigation.  In a 1998 debate with Garrett, Millican’s title raised the question “Hume on Reas on and Induction: Epistemology or Cognitive Science?”.  
His answer should have been that Hume’s treatment of induction is both epistemology and cognitive science.  (More 
broadly, the interpretation presented here can be seen as combining significant aspects of both their views: like Garrett, 
I reject the ambiguity thesis and see Hume as ascribing authority to induction throughout; like Millican, I take reason  
to embrace all sources of evidence and see Hume’s primary target as a perceptual understanding of it.)  57  Now is not the time to explore these matters fu rther, but we should note – and applaud – the 
momentous significance of Hume’s two revolutionary  contributions here.  First, in his argument 
concerning induction, he introduced the seminal con cept that a method of inference worthy of the 
name (not to be dismissed in Lockean fashion as a form of “madness”) might operate by sub-cognitive 
steps that are not dependent on the perception of tr ansparent connections between the relevant ideas.  
Secondly, in his discussion of the belief in body, he revealed for the first time something of the level 
of conceptual complexity involved  in the perceptual identification of persisting physical objects.  
Previous philosophers had take n both intellectual and physical perception to be relatively 
unproblematic, as an ideal paradi gm of what cognition should be.  Hume himself did not completely 
escape from this paradigm, but he subjected the percep tual ideal to a withering attack which, had it 
been fully appreciated at the time, might have hastened the development of cognitive science – 
including the understanding of inference and algorithmics – by nearly two centuries. 
____________________ 
 
Appendix: Hutcheson’s 1742 taxonomy of the faculties 
In §3.4 we saw a brief outline of the “common Divisions of the Faculties of the Soul” given by 
Hutcheson in a passage from his Illustrations upon the Moral Sense  which he added in 1742 
(pp. 219-20).  In the same edition, he also added a very similar footnote to his Essay on the Nature and 
Conduct of the Passions and Affections  (pp. 30-1), which explicitly identifies “the understanding, or 
reason”.  The date is intriguing, because in 1739-40 Hutcheson had seen Hume’s manuscript of 
Treatise  Book 3 and the published Books 1 and 2 (sen t to him by Kames), had corresponded with 
Hume, and had even assisted him in finding a new p ublisher.  Hutcheson’s own second edition of his 
Essay  and Illustrations  had appeared in 1730 without the taxonomic  paragraph or the footnote, so it is 
possible that he had been pondering on these matters for some time and shared relevant manuscripts 
with Hume.81  On the other hand, perhaps it was discuss ions with Hume that persuaded him, or 
perhaps prompted him to insist, that “Write rs on these Subjects should remember the common 
Division of the Faculties of the Soul”? 
 In Part II of his Metaphysicae Synopsis (first published in 1742 then expanded in 1744), 
Hutcheson greatly enlarged his account of the facu lties, starting (§2) with a general division between 
the intellect  and the will . Within that division, the senses  – external (§3), internal (§4), and reflexive 
(§5) – “report to the intellect” (1744, p. 112), along with memory , ratiocination , and imagination  
(§6).82  Various complications follow, and the will (to which the passions  report) is discussed at 
                                                      
81 In 1744, Hutcheson sent Hume a copy of his Philosophiae Moralis Institutio Compendiaria  (HL i 45): how much 
other writing might have passed between them over these years? 
82 I use the words “intellect” and “ratiocination” to reflect the Latin words used by Hutcheson (“intellectus” and 
“ratiocinandi” respectively).  In the modern translation by Michael Silverthorne, from which the quotations are taken, these are rendered as “the understanding” and “the power of  reasoning” respectively.  Unfortunately Hutcheson says 
almost nothing about the latter, but gives it prominence in the heading of §6 between “memory” and “imagination”.  
 58 comparable length, but the most important featur es can be summarised as follows (here a dotted line 
indicates a “reporting” relationship, a nd a solid line constituent categories): 
 
Hutcheson’s taxonomy is clearly more structured and sophisticated than the Humean taxonomy we 
identified in §2.2, the main differences being as follows: 
(a) Hume does not specify any “reporting” hierarchy, and hence puts the intellect  (understanding  
or reason ) alongside – rather than above – the imagination , memory  and senses .  This 
presumably reflects his rejection of the view of  the intellect as an executive overseer making 
judgements on the deliverances of subordinate f aculties.  Instead, as we saw in §2.1, he sees 
human judgement as a form of vivid conception founded on the imagination. 
(b) Relatedly, Hume nowhere distinguishes between the intellect  (understanding  or reason ) in 
general and a more specific, and apparently subordinate, power of ratiocination . 
(c) Hume – like Locke – equates internal sense  with reflection , whereas Hutcheson distinguishes 
the two, taking the former to involve “conscious ness, by means of which everything that takes 
place in the mind is known” while reflexive sensation  is “that sense which occurs to the mind 
when it is directed toward things previ ously perceived” (1744, p. 117).  Amongst the 
categories of reflexive sensation, Hutches on includes several “senses” that Hume would 
certainly not want to include in the (c ognitive) domain of “the understanding”. 
 
____________________ the intellect  the will 
smell hearing taste sight touch reflexive 
sensation ratiocination imagination memory the senses passions 
internal sense 
(“consciousness”) external 
senses 
aesthetic 
senses sympathy sense of 
humour sense of the 
fittin g/good  59 Works by David Hume 
T (1739-40), A Treatise of Human Nature: A Critical Edition , eds David Fate Norton and Mary J. Norton, 
Oxford University Press, 2007 – references indicated by “T”, and given to book, part, section and 
paragraph number, or “T App”  followed by paragraph number 
A (1740), Abstract of a book lately published, entituled, A Treatise of Human Nature, etc. , pp. 403-17 in 
Hume (1739-40) – references indicated by “A”, and given to paragraph number 
Essays  (1741-83), Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary , ed. Eugene F. Miller, Liberty Classics, 2nd edition 
1987 – references indicated by “Essays” , and given to page number 
L (1745), A Letter from a Gentleman to his Friend in Edinburgh , Edinburgh (anonymous, no named 
printer or bookseller); republished in facsimile ed. Ernest C. Mossner and John V. Price, Edinburgh 
University Press, 1967 – references indicated by “L”, and given to page number 
E (1748), An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding , ed. Peter Millican, Oxford University Press, 
2007 (1777 edition, includes textual variants) – references indicated by “E”, and given to section and 
paragraph number 
M (1751), An Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals , ed. Tom L. Beauchamp, Oxford University 
Press, 1998 (copytext 1772 edition) – references indicated by “M” , and given to section (or “M App 1” 
etc.) and paragraph number 
DOP  (1757), A Dissertation on the Passions  and The Natural History of Religion , ed. Tom L. Beauchamp, 
Oxford University Press, 2007 (cop ytext 1772 edition) – references to Dissertation  indicated by 
“DOP” , and given to section and paragraph number 
D (1779), Dialogues concerning Natural Religion,  ed. N. Kemp Smith, Nelson, 2nd edition 1947 – 
references indicated by “D”, and given to page number 
HL (1932), The Letters of David Hume , ed. J. Y. T. Greig, Clarendon Pr ess (OUP) – references indicated by 
“HL” , and given to volume and page number 
 
Other Primary Works 
Butler, Joseph (1736), The Analogy of Religion , ed. W. E. Gladstone, Clarendon Press (OUP), 1896 
Hartley, David (1749), Observations on Man, His Frame, His Duty, and His Expectations, Bath and London 
Hutcheson, Francis (1744), Synopsis of Metaphysics , translated by Michael Silverthorne from 2nd edition of 
Metaphysicae Synopsis  (1st was 1742), in Hutcheson, Logic, Metaphysics, and the Natural Sociability 
of Mankind , Liberty Fund, 2006 
Locke, John (1671), Draft B of the Essay Concerning Human Understanding, in Drafts for the Essay Concerning 
Human Understanding, and Other Philosophical Writings, ed. Peter H. Nidditch and G.A.J. Rogers, 
Clarendon Press (OUP), 1990, volume 1, pp.85-270 
Locke, John (1690), An Essay Concerning Human Understanding , ed. P.H. Nidditch, Clarendon Press (OUP), 
1975 – references indicated by “Essay” , and given to book, part, and section number 
Locke, John (1697), A Letter to the Right Reverend Edwa rd, Lord Bishop of Worcester  (the first letter to 
Stillingfleet), in Works of John Locke, in Nine Volumes , 12th edition, London, 1824, vol. III, pp. 1-96 
Reid, Thomas (1785), Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, Edinburgh 
Reid, Thomas (1788), Essays on the Active Powers of Man, Edinburgh Selby-Bigge, L.A. (1897), British Moralists , Clarendon Press (OUP), 2 volumes – includes selections from cited 
works by Hutcheson, Price, and Shaftesbury 
 
Secondary Works 
Alanen, Lilli (2006), “The Powers and Mechanisms  of the Passions”, in Saul Traiger (ed.), The Blackwell Guide 
to Hume’s Treatise , Blackwell, pp. 179-98 
Allison, Henry E. (2008), Custom and Reason in Hume: A Kantian Reading of the First Book of the Treatise, 
Clarendon Press (OUP) 
Arnold, N. Scott (1983), “Hume’s Sk epticism about Inductive Inference”, Journal of the History of Philosophy  
21, pp.31-55 
 60 Baier, Annette C. (1991), A Progress of Sentiments: Refl ections on Hume’s Treatise,  Harvard University Press 
Beauchamp, Tom and Mappes, Thomas (1975), “I s Hume Really a Sceptic about Induction?”, American 
Philosophical Quarterly  12, pp.119-29 
Beauchamp, Tom and Rosenberg, Alexander (1981), Hume and the Problem of Causation , Oxford University 
Press 
Beebee, Helen (2006), Hume on Causation , Routledge 
Broughton, Janet (1983), “Hume’s Skepticism about Causal Inferences”, Pacific Philosophical Quarterly  64, 
pp.3-18; reprinted in Owen 2000, pp. 149-64 
Cohon, Rachel (2008), Hume’s Morality: Feeling and Fabrication , Oxford University Press 
Falkenstein, Lorne (1997), “Natur alism, Normativity, and Scepticism in Hume’s Account of Belief”, Hume 
Studies  23, pp. 29-72, and reprinted in Owen (2000), pp. 219-62 
Flew, Antony (1961), Hume’s Philosophy of Belief , Routledge & Kegan Paul 
Garrett, Don (1997), Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy , Oxford University Press 
Garrett, Don (1998), “Ideas, Reason an d Skepticism: Replies to my Critics”, Hume Studies  24, pp.171-94 
Garrett, Don (2001), “Reply to David Owen”, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research  62, pp. 205-9. 
Kail, P. J. E. (2007), Projection and Realism in Hume’s Philosophy , Oxford University Press 
Kenyon, J. D. (1985), “Doubts about the Concept of Reason”, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, 
Supplementary Volume  59, pp. 249-67 
Loeb, Louis (2002), Stability and Justification in  Hume’s Treatise, Oxford University Press 
Loeb, Louis (2006), “Psychology, Epistemology, and Skepticism in Hume’s Argument about Induction”, 
Synthese  152, pp. 321-38 
Millican, P.J.R. (1995), “Hume’s Argument Concerning Induction: Structure and Interpretation”, in Stanley 
Tweyman (ed.), David Hume: Critical Assessments , London: Routledge, volume 2, pp. 91-144; 
reprinted in Owen 2000, pp. 165-218 
Millican, Peter (1998), “Hume on Reason and Indu ction: Epistemology or Cognitive Science?”, Hume Studies  
24, pp.141-59 
Millican, Peter (2002), “Hume’s Sceptical Doubts Concerning Induction”, in Millican (ed.), Reading Hume on 
Human Understanding: Essays on the First Enquiry , Clarendon Press OUP), pp. 107-73 
Millican, Peter (2007), “Humes Old and New: Four Fa shionable Falsehoods, and One Unfashionable Truth”, 
Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volume  81, pp. 163-99 
Noonan, Harold W. (1999), Hume on Knowledge , Routledge 
Norton, David Fate (1982), David Hume: Common-Sense Moralist, Sceptical Metaphysician , Princeton 
University Press 
Owen, David (1999), Hume’s Reason , Oxford University Press 
Owen, David W. D., ed. (2000), Hume: General Philosophy , Ashgate 
Roth, Abraham Sesshu (2006), “Causation”, in Saul Traiger (ed.), The Blackwell Guide to Hume’s Treatise , 
Blackwell, pp. 95-113 
Stove, D.C. (1965), “Hume,  Probability, and Induction”, Philosophical Review  74, pp.160-77; reprinted in V.C. 
Chappell ed., Hume (Macmillan, 1968), pp.187-212 
Stove, D.C. (1973), Probability and Hume’s Inductive Scepticism , Clarendon Press (OUP) 
Stroud, Barry (1977), Hume , Routledge & Kegan Paul 
Traiger, Saul (1987), “Impressions, Ideas, and Fictions”, Hume Studies  13, pp. 381-99 
Winkler, Kenneth (1999), “Hume’s Inductive Skepticism”, in Margaret Atherton (ed.), The Empiricists , 
Rowman & Littlefield, pp. 183-212 
Winters, Barbara (1979) “Hume on Reason”, Hume Studies  5, pp.20-35; reprinted in Owen 2000, pp. 133-48 
Winters, Barbara (1981), “Hume’s Argument for the Superiority of Natural Instinct”, Dialogue  20, pp. 635-43 
 
____________________ 
 
Acknowledgements to be added. 