Comments on Dario Perinetti “Hume’s Sceptical Solutions” 
Peter Millican, Hertford Colle ge, Oxford and IASH, Edinburgh 
 
Perinetti’s paper is interesting and provocative, covering a broa d range and sugge sting fruitful 
readings that deserve to be explored further and in detail.  Unfortunately, time prevents me 
from doing these justice, so I shall confine my self mainly to comments on and objections to 
his general approach.  In brief,  I shall suggest that his intere sting ideas about Hume’s theory 
of ideas and their limits might be better divorced  from his consideration of Humean “sceptical 
solutions”. 
 First, there is an obviou s difficulty in seeking a general  “understanding [of] what is 
for Hume a sceptical solution”, because Hume uses the phrase “sceptical solution” only once – in the title of Section 5 of the Enquiry concerning Human Understanding  – and gives no 
indication there of the phrase’s  having any special significance or  implicit reference to other 
authors, ancient or modern.  Moreover the phr ase cannot be found, as far as I know (after a 
search on ECCO and EEBO) in the writings of any of his contemporaries, so any attempt to derive a general  understanding from the sing le instance is bound to be  speculative.  Kripke’s 
suggestion, quoted in Perinetti ’s second footnote, is perhaps as good a try as any: 
“a sceptical  solution of a sceptical philosophical problem begins … by conceding that the 
sceptic’s negative assertions are unanswerable.  Nevertheless our ordinary practice or belief is 
justified because – contrary appearances notwithst anding – it need not require the justification 
the sceptic has shown to be untenable.”  (Kripke 1982, p. 66) 
This fits pretty closely with a plausible interp retation of what Hume is up to in Section 5 of 
the Enquiry : showing that our i nductive practice is unaffected  by the “sceptical doubts” of 
Section 4 because it depends on instinctive custom  rather than rational insight .  But I remain 
doubtful whether there is anything to be ga ined by treating Hume’s use of the phrase 
“sceptical solution” as a focus of investiga tion into his wider purposes.  Suppose we judge 
that arguments in other sections of his works di splay a similar pattern – what then?  The more 
we find similarities between Enquiry  5 and other sections, the mo re reason we have to doubt 
that we have correctly identified what led Hume to use the phrase in just this one instance.  
The thematic similarities may be rich and illu minating, but the phrase it self gives us no help 
at all. 
 In moving on to consider the general ch aracter of Hume’s sceptical discussions, 
Perinetti’s own preferred theme is “the re lation between epistemological and semantic 
scepticism in Hume’s writings”.  Some of Hu me’s discussions can indeed be seen as hinging 
on this relation, but not his treatment of induction and cust om – his one explicitly identified 
“sceptical solution” to “sceptical doubt” – which is purely epistemological without a hint of 
semantic scepticism.  Many Hume commentators,  encouraged by his interweaved discussion 
in the Treatise , have tended to run togeth er his discussions of i nduction and causation (the 
latter of which indeed hinges largely on semantic  issues).  But it is striking that in the 
Enquiry , the very work which talks of a “sceptical solution”, Hume ’s “sceptical doubts” about 
induction are treated quite indepe ndently of his anal ysis of causation, and come long before 
there is any mention of his quest for the impr ession of necessary conn exion, with its strong 
semantic overtones. 
 I also have a concern about the id ea that Hume’s philosophical views can 
appropriately be characterised in terms of a co nsistent “relation between epistemological and 
semantic scepticism”.  Perinetti contrast s what he takes to be the two dominant 
interpretations, on the one hand that for Hume “epistemological scepticism entails semantic scepticism”, and on the other that “epistemologi cal scepticism … is compatible with holding the cogency of some metaphysical views about th e ultimate structure of reality”.  The latter 
view, identified as New Humean, enables us “t o read Hume as holding … that, though real 
causes or external objects cannot be known, th eir existence is neve rtheless a reasonable 
supposition”.  And by contrast the former, Old Humean, reading is seen as denying the 
existence of these things.  Perinetti then pr oposes “a third way to understand the relation 
between epistemological and semantic scepti cism”, whereby “Epistemological scepticism 
leads 1) to the discovery that the ideas [concer ned] are ‘confused’ or ‘obscure’ and 2) to a 
radical revision of the content of the beliefs under scrutiny.  The practi cal significance of 
sceptical arguments lies in [their helping to reveal] the psychological mechanisms 
underpinning problematic beliefs.” 
 I think Perinetti is right to endorse this third way in the case of causation, where Hume 
quite explicitly sets out to identify the impre ssion-source of the idea of power or necessary 
connexion as a means of removing obscurity a nd clarifying the beliefs concerned.  Here, 
moreover, Hume succeeds in finding the impression he seeks, proving that the idea is indeed 
legitimate.  As I read him, Hume is no sceptic about causation, and he does believe in real 
causes; indeed his investigation re veals what it takes to  be a real cause, namely, satisfaction of 
his two definitions.1  But I am not convinced that Perinetti is right to see the same pattern at 
play in the case of the external world, wh ere Hume’s investigation does not discover any bona 
fide impressions as the original of  our ideas of continuing external  objects, but instead reveals 
those supposed ideas to be “fictions” of doubtful legitimacy, based on “trivi al qualities of the 
fancy, conducted by … false suppositions” ( T 1.4.2.56, SB 217).  Here there is no apparent 
“radical revision of the content of the beliefs under scrutiny”; instead, we are counselled to 
ignore the difficulty and carry on believing as before as we qu it our study for the dinner or 
backgammon table: “Carelessness and in-a ttention alone can afford us any remedy” 
(T 1.4.2.57, SB 218). 
 Summing up so far, I am sceptical about “big picture” interpreta tions of Hume that 
gloss his various arguments as f unctioning in more or less the same way.  As I see it, very 
crudely, on induction, we have an epistemologica l conclusion with implications for cognitive 
science, but no significant element of seman tic scepticism.  On causation, we have an 
argument whose direct aim is the clarificati on of our ideas, and with  implications that can be 
read as sceptical, but can equally be read as constructive (depending on whether one rejects or 
accepts the Humean view of causation).  On the ex ternal world, we have an investigation into 
the origin of certain ideas that leads to a sceptical semantic  conclusion about those ideas, and 
which can also be read as generating an epistemological  scepticism about the corresponding 
beliefs.  If we went on to include others of  Hume’s famous arguments, we would find yet 
more variations on these themes. 
 Despite these cautionary words, I agree wi th much of what Perinetti says about 
Hume’s Copy Principle, and in particular his key claim that Hume’s use of it is generally 
“about the pretended origin  of some key ideas” and “not abou t whether they do have an origin 
or are merely empty words”.  Hume’s own presen tations of the Principle are in this respect 
rather misleading.  In the Treatise , he introduces it primarily as a way of settling the issue of 
                                                 
1 This is not to deny, of course, that there is plenty of room for debate about the interpretation of Hume’s two 
definitions, and how far they make room for a genuine notion of causal power in objects.  For a sketch of my 
own preferred approach, see “Hume, Ca usal Realism, and Causal Science”, Mind  118 (2009), pp. 647-712, §4.  
Perinetti, near the end of his paper, seems to take a more  sceptical view: “The result of the sceptical challenge is 
not suspension of judgment about causality.  The result is that  we give up all attempts to find causality as a real 
property of external objects.  And we give up thes e attempts … because the sceptical challenge and solution 
cause us to no longer wish to understand causality in these terms.  We no longer think, that is, that anything short 
of realism about causality is an unsatisfactory conception of it.” innate ideas ( T 1.1.1.12), with no indication at that stage of its an alytical role.  In the Abstract  
and Enquiry , it is presented more as a m eans of identifying bogus ideas: 
All ideas, especially abstract  ones, are naturally faint and obscure: … They are apt to be 
confounded with other resembling ideas; and when we have often employed any term, though without a distinct meaning, we are apt to imagine it has a determinate idea, annexed to it.  On 
the contrary, all impressions, that is, all sensat ions, either outward or inward, are strong and 
vivid: The limits between them are more exactly determined: Nor is it easy to fall into any error or mistake with regard to them.  When we  entertain, therefore, any suspicion, that a 
philosophical term is employed without any meaning or idea (as is but too frequent), we need 
but enquire, from what impression is that supposed idea derived?   And if it be impossible to 
assign any, this will serve to confirm our suspicion.  …  ( E 2.9, SB 21-2; cf. Abstract  7, SB 
648-9) 
Later in the Enquiry , the Copy Principle is applied only to the idea of power or necessary 
connexion, and as we have noted, is there used to identify the genuine impression rather than 
to dismiss the idea.  To find cases in which Hu me uses it to “confirm our suspicion … that a 
philosophical term is employed without any mean ing or idea”, we must look instead to the 
Treatise .  Candidates for such bogus would-be ideas  include those of material substance, 
existence, and the self, but ev en as such bogus ideas  are being dismissed there is usually a 
caveat: 
“We have therefore no  idea of substance, distinct from that of a collection of particular 
qualities , nor have we any other  meaning when we either talk  or reason concerning it.”  
(T 1.1.6.1, SB 16) 
“… the idea of existence is not deriv’d from any particular impression.  The idea of existence, 
then, is the very same with the idea of what we conceive to be existent .”  (T 1.2.6.3-4, SB 66) 
“… we have no impression of self or substance, as something simple and individual .  We 
have therefore, no idea of them in that sense ”  (Appendix  11, SB 633) 
Only very rarely do we  find Hume unambiguously rejecting  a term as meaningless using his 
Copy Principle, as opposed to replacing  a confused notion with a clea rer alternative.  The best 
examples I have found are those of  mental substance and inherence:2 
“I know no better method, than to ask these philosophers in a few words, What they mean by 
substance and inhesion?   …  This question we have found impossible to be answer’d with 
regard to matter and body: But besides that in the case of the mind, it labours under all the same difficulties, ’tis burthen’d with some addition al ones, which are peculiar to that subject.  
As every idea is deriv’d from a precedent impressi on, had we any idea of the substance of our 
minds, we must also have an impression of it; which is very difficult, if not impossible, to be conceiv’d.  …  Thus neither by considering th e first origin of ideas, nor by means of a 
definition are we able to arrive at any satisfact ory notion of substance …  We have, therefore, 
no idea of a substance.  …  We have … no idea of inhesion.  What possibility then of 
answering that question, Whether perceptions inhere in a material or immaterial substance , 
when we do not so much as understand the meaning of the question?”  ( T 1.4.5.2-6, SB 
232-3) 
It would be interesting to see a systematic study of Hume’s use of  the Copy Principle; I 
believe it would largely confirm the emphasis that  Perinetti suggests on the basis of his own 
examples: the ideas of a vacuum and absolute time ( T 1.2.5.29, SB 65), and the self ( T 1.4.6.2, 
SB 251). 
                                                 
2 Solidity might be another example ( T 1.4.4.11-14), although Hume’s attitude to it remains somewhat unclear.  
In the Abstract , (7, SB 649) he says “… if no impression can be produced, he concludes that the term is 
altogether insignificant.  ’Tis after this manner he examines our idea of substance  and essence ”.  But in fact he 
never examines the idea of essence  in this way, and standardly talks of  essences himself in a way that seems 
intended quite sincerely.  However my doubts about Perinetti’s “big pi cture” return again when he goes on – in 
his section on “Meaning and conf usion”, to “push the claim a bit further”.  That section 
includes a tantalising discussion of Hume and the blind poet Thomas Blacklock, which 
deserves attention in itself.3  But given my role as critical  commentator, I want to pick up 
instead on Perinetti’s grouping together of a ra nge of ideas – “time”, “necessary connexion”, 
“external object”, “substance” and “God” – most of which Hume seems to  me to treat rather 
differently from each other.  Most of these have already been mentioned above, and the newcomer, the idea of God, is accounted for by Hume in a very straightforward manner that 
makes no mention of confusion:
4 
“The idea of God, as meaning an infinitely intelligent, wise, and good Being, arises from 
reflecting on the operations of our own mind, and augmenting, without limit, those qualities of goodness and wisdom.”  ( E 2.6, SB 19) 
I also have a worry that Perinetti might be runni ng together different kinds of “confusion” and 
treating them all under the umbrella of his in teresting theory.  His footnote 12 usefully 
collects together various Hum ean references to confused notions , ideas , or conceptions , but 
these cover quite a wide range, from losing track in complex arguments ( T 1.3.13.6, SB 146 
and E 9.5 n. 20, E 107 n.), to mistaken “spreading of  the mind” in the case of a fig’s taste 
(T 1.4.5.13, SB 238), to misunderstanding terms in di scussions of liberty and responsibility 
(T 2.3.1.13, SB 404).  Later he glosses Hume as sa ying that “the psychological mechanism of 
confusion” is “the cause of many mi stakes and sophisms in philosophy” ( T 1.2.5.20, SB 61).  
But here Hume is referring to the mechanism of association , by which the animal spirits can 
be speculated to “rummage that cell” in the brain where an idea resides and thus disturb 
related cells, sometimes leading us to replace on e idea for another without noticing.  It’s not 
clear to me how well this coheres with Perinett i’s theory: for example, rummaging of cells is 
presumably indifferent between specific and general ideas.5  But aside from this sort of broad 
reservation, I think hi s 7-step attempt to reconstruct “Hume’s views on confusion” is 
interesting and illuminating, well worthy of furt her research.  How far it genuinely reflects 
Hume’s own worked-out position is unclear, but th at is inevitable: many of us will know what 
it is like trying to fit together  a mixture of Humean claims, ga rnered from a range of texts 
written over a decade or more, and having to resort to our own invention to fill in the gaps as 
coherently as possible.  Perinetti has collected a decent framework of quotations to build his 
theory, providing a plausible basi s for systematic investigation and refinement in the light of a 
more comprehensive survey of how his theory will match up to what Hume says elsewhere.  It will not surprise me if something like his theory survives scrutiny as a fairly plausible reconstruction of a strand of Hume’s view on confusion of ideas.  But though open-minded on 
the matter, I rather doubt that any more solid re sult can be achieved here.  A lot turns on how 
far Hume’s theory of general or abstract ideas – presented in Treatise  1.1.7 – informs what he 
says elsewhere, and the evidence for this is rather thin.  Apart from Treatise  1.1.7 itself, that 
theory gets mentioned only at T 1.2.3.5-6 (ideas of space and time), 1.3.14.13 (a general idea 
                                                
 
3 Perinetti’s perceptive reference to the Blacklock case ca n perhaps be strengthened by noting that a 1754 letter 
to Joseph Spence in which Hume discusses it ( HL i 200) seems to be referring to events somewhat earlier, 
apparently around 1742 (when Hume first met Blacklock) and around 1753 (cf. HL i 183). 
4 Towards the end of his paper, Perinetti suggests that “The idea of God is ‘contradictory’ because it has a 
complex relation; on the one hand, to the passions (fear, hope) from which it is derived and, on the other hand, to the understanding that tries to comprehend it.”  But I can not find any text in which Hume says that the idea of 
God itself is contradictory or dubiously comprehensible for this sort of reason, so I am not sure which passages 
Perinetti is alluding to here. 
5 Perinetti draws on the immediately following Treatise  paragraph as suggesting the Humean principle: 
“(6) Related customs:  two customs are related when ideas in the sets they respectively revive stand in relations 
of resemblance, contiguity or causation. ( T 1.2.5.21/ SBN 61-2)”.  But again it’s not at all clear to me that Hume 
here has in mind his theory of general ideas. of power presupposes some particular inst ance), 1.4.3.10 (how a term can rely upon the 
customary revival of ideas, without any idea present), 2.3.6.2 (general ideas are more obscure 
and have less influence on the imagination), Appendix  2 (no abstract idea of existence), and 
E 12.25 n. 34 (the Treatise  theory of abstraction might avoid the paradoxes of infinite 
divisibility).6  This all adds up to a pretty meagre textual basis for claiming that the theory 
comprehensively informs Hume’s thinking.  The same comment would apply equally, for 
example, to Don Garrett’s ingenious r econstruction of Hume’s position on the two 
“definitions of cause”, in which again the theory of general ideas  plays a key role.  Here too I 
remain sceptical, while applauding the effort to see how the theory would  apply if Hume 
himself thought to do so. 
 After presenting his interest ing 7-step reconstruction of Hume’s theory of confused 
ideas, Perinetti suggests that it “sheds new li ght” on Hume’s attitude to intelligibility as 
informed by the Copy Principle.  We should no t read Hume “as suggesting that obscure or 
confused ideas are radically  unintelligible”.  Even in the case of “metaphysical ideas that 
cannot possibly be derived – directly or indir ectly – from an antecedent impression, … we 
should refrain from drawing the conclusion  that the term is  also altogether meaningless .  For, 
it is still open to us to have a ‘confused’ general  idea about these metaphysical entities.”  
Maybe that is right, though again I am sceptical th at such claims can be justified in advance of 
detailed consideration of specific cases.  And any such detailed consideration would have to 
take account of Hume’s talk of “fictions”, whic h play a major role in some such cases (e.g. 
our thoughts about external bodies),  but are hardly mentioned in Perinetti’s paper.  How the 
theory of fictions would mesh with Hume’s disc ussion of general ideas is , as far as I recall, 
pretty much unexplored terri tory in the literature. 
 Coming now to the final section of Perinett i’s paper, headed “Sceptical solutions”, I 
very much like the sentence with which it starts : “One of the conseque nces of the reading I 
am proposing is that problematic ideas about wh ich sceptical doubts can be raised are not all 
problematic in the same manner.”  But there is something of a tension in this final section, 
pulled between the recognition of  variety in Hume’s treatme nts on the one hand, and on the 
other a desire “to make plain th e general features of Humean so lutions”.  As I have explained, 
I am not convinced that there are such consistent “general features”, at least in respect of the 
workings  of those “Humean solutions”, and I see mo re variety here than Perinetti himself 
acknowledges.  Moreover those “solutions” th at most closely conform to the style he 
identifies – involving investiga tion of the source and nature of  the relevant ideas – are very 
distant from the one “sceptical solution” that Hume himself thus  names: his appeal to custom 
as a “solution” to his problem of induction.  So I would not be  happy for that phrase to be 
appropriated for that style of treatment.  Neve rtheless I agree with much of the spirit of 
Perinetti’s final paragraph, wh ich identifies unity in the point  of the various Humean 
“solutions”, and sees “no tensi on between Hume’s sceptical stan ce and his natu ralistic project 
of a science of human nature”.  To end on a note of agreement, therefore: 
“Hume’s science of human nature identifies the particular  disquiets produced by obscure 
beliefs, and so is conducive to particular positive solutions.  In other words … Hume’s 
scepticism is compatible with positive revisions of beliefs and with positive reform of 
personal, social, and political practices.” 
 
____________________  
   
                                                 
6 I have not included T 1.2.4.12, which considers an alleged abstraction without separation rather than Hume’s 
own theory, nor E 12.15, which endorses Berkeley’s criticism of Lockean abstraction. 