aReason, Induction and Causation 
in Hume’s Philosophy
Don Garrett and Peter Millican
The Institute for Advanced Studies in the Humanities
The University of Edinburgh
2011bGarrett, Don and Millican, Peter
Reason, Induction and Causation in Hume’s Philosophy
This series of occasional papers is published by
The Institute for Advanced Studies in the Humanities
The University of Edinburgh
2 Hope Park Square
Edinburgh EH8 9NW
Published July 2011
Copyright © Don Garrett and Peter Millican 2011
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored, or transmitted in any form without 
the written permission of the authors.
ISSN 2041-8817
ISBN 978-0-9568610-3-0 
IASH Occasional Papers, 19cAbout the Authors
DON GARRETT  is Professor and Chair of the Department of Philosophy at 
New York University. He has taught previously at Harvard University, the 
University of Utah, and the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 
where he was Kenan Distinguished Professor for Teaching Excellence. 
He is the author of Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy  
(Oxford University Press, 1997) and the forthcoming Hume  (Routledge). 
In addition, he is the editor of The Cambridge Companion to Spinoza  
and has served as editor of Hume Studies  and as North American editor 
of the Archiv für Geschichte der Philosophie . He was recently elected to 
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. He is currently Carnegie 
Centenary Professor at the University of Edinburgh.
PETER  M ILLICAN  is Reader in Early Modern Philosophy at the University 
of Oxford, and Gilbert Ryle Fellow in Philosophy at Hertford College, 
Oxford. He is also Illumni David Hume Fellow at the Institute for 
Advanced Studies in the Humanities, University of Edinburgh, and 
Honorary Visiting Professor at the University of York. From 2005 until 
2010, he was Co-Editor of Hume Studies . Prior to his appointment at 
Oxford, he taught for 20 years at the University of Leeds, where he was 
Senior Lecturer in Philosophy and Computing, and Founder Director of 
the Leeds Electronic Text Centre. He recently unveiled a new electronic 
edition of Hume’s Dialogues  (both text and original manuscript) hosted 
at www.davidhume.org  – the major Hume resource on the web – which he 
runs together with Amyas Merivale, who works at the Leeds Etext Centre. 
Peter’s philosophical interests and publications cover a wide range but 
with a particular focus on David Hume and related topics in epistemology, 
philosophy of religion, and ethics.d1Susan Manning: Welcome everybody to the Institute for Advanced 
Studies. Thank you all for packing in like sardines – I think it’s an 
indication of the interest and enthusiasm people have for what 
promises to be an intimate [laughter] and also a very feisty dialogue, 
WKH¿QDORQHRIRXUVHULHV Dialogues with Hume , commemorating the 
three hundredth anniversary of the birth of David Hume this year. 
We couldn’t have two more eminent or more adversarial … [laughter] 
… Humeans than our two speakers today. We’re extremely lucky to 
be able to bring together in one room for your entertainment and 
education this afternoon Professor Don Garrett and Dr Peter Millican. 
,ZRXOGMXVWOLNHWRLQWURGXFHWKHPYHU\EULHÀ\VRWKDWZHFDQKDYH
maximum time for hearing them in dialogue. Don Garrett is currently 
here as Carnegie Centenary Professor at the Institute, and we are very 
grateful to the Carnegie Trust for the Universities of Scotland for 
making his visit to Edinburgh possible. He’s doing a lot of duty for us 
and for Scottish universities as a whole while he’s here as Carnegie 
Professor. In other life, he is Professor and Chair for the Department 
of Philosophy at New York University. He has taught previously 
at Harvard, the University of Utah, and the University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill where he was Kenan Distinguished Professor 
for Teaching Excellence; so he teaches as well as philosophizes. He 
is best known in the philosophical and Humean community for his 
Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy , which came out in 
1997 and he has a forthcoming book on Hume, which is going to be a 
very important addition to the literature. As well as this, he’s editor of 
the Cambridge Companion to Spinoza  and he was recently elected to 
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. 
 Then to Don’s left, we have Dr Peter Millican who is Reader in 
Early Modern Philosophy at the University of Oxford and Gilbert Ryle 
Fellow in Philosophy at Hertford College, Oxford. We’ve also been 
extremely fortunate to have Peter with us over the last year on and off 
at the Institute, and he has also done sterling duty for the University 2and for the Edinburgh community at large – some of you may have 
attended his wonderful lecture for the Royal Society last month. That 
ZDVDWHUUL¿FRFFDVLRQ:H¶YHDOVRKDGVHYHUDORSSRUWXQLWLHVWRKHDU
him talk about different aspects of Hume while he’s been here. Peter 
is with us courtesy of the Ilumni David Hume Fellowship, which was 
very generously offered to us by an anonymous group in Edinburgh, 
and we hope that it will be an avatar of a longer-term David Hume 
Tercentenary Fellowship, which we are trying to raise money for at 
the moment because it seems that Edinburgh, above all, should be 
the home of a regular series of eminent Humeans, such as we’ve been 
privileged to host in the past two years. Further information about that 
appeal is available after the session if you should like to have it. But let 
me just tell you more about Peter’s work. He is one of the most eminent 
British Humeans. He has been Co-Editor of Hume Studies  and indeed 
is the only Co-Editor of the Hume journal to come from outside North 
America. He is now, as I said, teaching at Oxford, but before his Oxford 
time he taught for twenty years at the University of Leeds, where he was 
Senior Lecturer in Computing and Philosophy and Founder Director 
of the Leeds Electronic Text Centre. Peter has been instrumental in 
establishing a new and very innovative degree in Computer Science 
and Philosophy at Oxford. And knowing something about the Oxbridge 
system as I do, I can say that is no small achievement, bringing in 
something new! However, I don’t want to take any more of our time 
right now because we want to hear Peter and Don. So I will leave you to 
it: ‘Reason, Induction and Causation in Hume’s Philosophy’.
Peter Millican: We’ll divide this session into two parts, and begin with 
induction and reason, which we’re putting together as a single topic; 
then we’ll go on to causation. I’m going to start by introducing induction 
and reason, then I’ll hand over to Don to say his piece, and then I’ll 
say mine. We’ll have some discussion before we move on, with roles 
reversed for causation.3One of Hume’s most original, important and famous arguments 
concerns the drawing of inferences to ‘matters of fact’ that we have not 
(yet) observed.  Suppose, for example, that I see one billiard ball rolling 
fast towards another; I infer that they will collide and that the second 
ball will then move. Why?  According to Hume, any such inference 
has to be based on experience and involves extrapolating from past 
to future, or from observed to unobserved.  This sort of inference – 
we call it inductive inference these days, but Hume called it ‘probable 
reasoning’ or ‘reasoning concerning matter of fact’ – takes for granted, 
or presupposes, according to Hume, a principle of extrapolation: that 
the behaviour of unobserved things will resemble that of observed 
things. So we’re supposing that things will go on the way they have. 
This is commonly called Hume’s ‘Uniformity Principle’.
 Hume’s argument considers, and in turn rejects, various ways 
of trying to establish this Uniformity Principle. Having rejected 
them all, he concludes in the Treatise  that inductive inferences ‘are 
not determin’d by reason’ [Hume 1739-40 (henceforth ‘ Treatise ’), 
1.3.6.12] or in the Enquiry  that ‘our conclusions from [experience] 
are not founded on reasoning, or any process of the understanding’ 
[Hume 1748 (henceforth ‘ Enquiry ’), 4.15].  Traditionally, this has been 
interpreted as a radically sceptical result, implying that induction 
falls outside the domain of reason, thus making it non-rational, 
perhaps even irrational.  But this would seem to imply that inductive 
inference from experience is no better than soothsaying. If you want 
to know about the future, why use induction rather than any other 
method?  There are all sorts of superstitious methods for telling the 
future, and it sounds like induction is no better than them if it’s not 
part of reason. But such scepticism is very hard to square with a great 
deal of what Hume wrote, because he famously extolled the virtues of 
introducing the experimental method of reasoning into ‘the science 
of man’, and forthrightly condemned superstition. Interpreters such 
as Antony Flew [1961] and David Stove [1973] accused Hume of being 4embarrassingly inconsistent, but Hume’s defenders soon rallied to his 
defence against this implausibly crude accusation.
 When Don and I came to this problem, twenty years or so ago, the 
orthodox solution to Hume’s apparent inconsistency was to see him as 
operating with two different notions of ‘reason’, a strict rationalistic 
notion within the famous argument, and a looser, naturalistic sense 
elsewhere. So when Hume says induction isn’t founded on reason or 
determined by reason, he’s using the word ‘reason’ in a very narrow 
sense that demands total certainty .  Then the point of the argument 
could be seen as precisely to reject  this rationalistic notion, by 
showing its complete impotence outside the narrow realm of deductive 
reasoning, mathematics and so forth: if reason, so conceived, was 
unable even to tell us that a billiard ball would move when hit, then 
this was clearly a hopelessly inadequate conception of human reason. 
But Hume himself had a quite different and far less extreme notion of 
human reason; at least that was the story. This style of interpretation, 
¿UVW SURSRVHG LQ  E\ 7RP %HDXFKDPS DQG 7KRPDV 0DSSHV
quickly became dominant, being presented with slight variations in 
LQÀXHQWLDOSXEOLFDWLRQVE\DWOHDVWKDOIDGR]HQDXWKRUV%XWERWK'RQ
and I – coming to the problem in the late 1980s, quite independently – 
came up with very similar objections to it, which seemed to us to refute 
it outright.  We came to know each other’s work when my long 1995 
paper and Don’s 1997 book were both going through their respective 
presses.  That’s really what got us going, arguing about these things. I 
think it is fair to say that the particular style of interpretation we were 
both attacking was pretty much killed stone dead one way or another; 
at least, I don’t think anyone has defended it since, or made any effort 
to respond to our objections.
 Although Don and I were very much agreed about the objections 
to be made to these previous interpretations, we had very different 
solutions of our own.  The problem was to make sense of how Hume 
could on the one hand be saying that induction was not determined by 5reason, but on the other hand, be a great supporter of induction. Don’s 
approach, inspired mainly by Hume’s argument in the Treatise , took 
Humean reason to be, quite unambiguously, the faculty of inference, 
argument, rather than of rationality in general.  Thus interpreted, the 
conclusion of the famous argument – that induction is not ‘determin’d 
by reason’ – says not that induction is non-rational, but only that our 
inductive inferences are not themselves produced by any mediating 
inference.  That was Don’s line. My own line, inspired more by Hume’s 
argument in the Enquiry , took reason in the famous argument to 
be a Lockean notion, based on the idea of perception of truth , and 
incorporating not only inference but also self-evidence (what Locke 
and Hume call ‘intuition’), and I took that to be part of reason even 
though it’s not argumentative or inferential in any mediated, stepwise 
sense. And also, reason consults the deliverances of the senses. But 
unlike Don, I retained the orthodox view that Hume was operating 
with more than one notion of reason, and that the famous argument’s 
role was to reject the previously established notion in favour of a 
broader Humean conception.
 Very soon after Don’s book appeared, he and I debated all this 
at the Monterey Hume Conference of 1997 and in subsequent Hume 
Studies SXEOLFDWLRQVLQ,QUHWURVSHFW,VWLOO¿QGDORWRIYDOXDEOH
points made in that discussion, but I think it is fair to say that for both 
of us, attack was more successful than defence!  After researching 
in detail the ‘faculty’ language of Hume and his contemporaries, I 
became convinced two years ago that Don had been right all along 
in his lonely insistence (because he was standing out against pretty 
much everybody else) that the notion of reason within the famous 
argument is Hume’s own, rather than a rival conception being set up 
IRUUHIXWDWLRQ,I\RXUHPHPEHUWKH¿UVWSDSHU,JDYHKHUHDW,$6+
when I came last year was on exactly this topic: Hume’s faculties. But 
I am also more than ever convinced that I was right to see reason as 
VLJQL¿FDQWO\EURDGHUWKDQMXVWDIDFXOW\RILQIHUHQFH7RGD\'RQDQG,6have the opportunity to review where we stand on the issue, fourteen 
years after our Monterey meeting, with – I believe – far more now in 
common than dividing us.  From my own point of view, certainly, it 
has been more than anything else the repeated interactions with Don, 
and the force of his arguments, that have kept me thinking critically 
about my own views on these matters. 
Don Garrett: Thanks very much, Peter. That was very fair. What I am 
about to say about reason and induction, which has already been partly 
described by Peter, has been much improved through interaction with 
him. He got me to abandon a formulation of it that was in my book 
and that was unduly narrow. We’ve been discussing this at Hume 
FRQIHUHQFHVIRUDERXW¿IWHHQ\HDUVQRZDQGZHGRKDYHDJHQHUDO
principle that anything we can agree on is generally right. [laughter] 
And there are getting to be more and more things. As Peter said, my 
view is that reason for Hume is the faculty of reasoning, that is, the 
faculty of making inferences. There are two kinds of such reasoning 
for Hume: demonstrative reasoning , which establishes things with 
certainty and makes the denial of the conclusions inconceivable, 
prevalent in mathematics, and then there’s everything else, which 
is called probable reasoning  and turns out to be dependent on 
experience. That this is his way of understanding ‘reason’ is shown 
in particular by his common interchanges of ‘things due to reason’ 
and ‘things due to reasoning’, by his terms ‘demonstrative reasoning’ 
and ‘probable reasoning’ as names for sub-faculties of reason, and 
especially by his repeated form of argument: ‘if not by demonstrative 
reason and not by probable reason, then not done by reason.’ That 
occurs in several topics in Hume – at least three topics, one of which is 
induction. It is also shown by his treatment ‘Of the reason of animals’ 
[Treatise  1.3.16], which is about the inferences that animals make. 
This is a somewhat narrow use of the term ‘reason’, narrower than 
some other uses of the term ‘reason’ at the time, uses that Peter will 7GHVFULEHVRPHRIZKLFKDUHVRPHZKDWKRQRUL¿FRURSSRVHGWRµIDLWK¶
IRUH[DPSOHUHDVRQYVIDLWK%XWLWLV,WKLQN/RFNH¶VRI¿FLDOVHQVH
so I’m invoking a feature of Locke’s view here. I think Locke was very 
LQÀXHQWLDORQ+XPHRQWKLVSDUWLFXODUVRUWRIWRSLFWKHWHUPLQRORJ\
and delineation of epistemic faculties. 
 You also see it in James Beattie, responding directly to Hume. 
Beattie distinguishes four senses of the term ‘reason’, but the fourth 
sense is that of ‘those who are most accurate in distinguishing’ 
[Beattie 1770, pp. 32-33]: they use ‘reason’ as the name of the faculty 
for making inferences. Beattie says that’s the sense in which he will 
use it, as the term for the faculty of inference. That sense is common 
throughout the history of philosophy, as are others; so far, we each 
have instances to cite. Reason in this sense is an important object of 
study in the science of man, which is what Hume proposes to be doing, 
and he is studying that process. He is especially studying probable 
LQIHUHQFHZKLFKKHWKLQNVKDVQRWEHHQVXI¿FLHQWO\H[DPLQHGDQG
which he claims depends on the relation of cause and effect (which 
we will discuss later). The relation of cause and effect then depends 
in turn on experience of constant conjunctions, that is: two things 
going together. You see one thing following another enough times, 
and then you see one and you project that the other will also occur. 
Reason, as Hume conceives it, is a function, surprisingly, of the 
imagination  in one broad sense of that term. He has two senses of the 
term ‘imagination’. Imagination in the broad sense is just the faculty 
of having ideas that are not memories. So anything that happens 
with ideas, the production of ideas, the production of ideas of various 
kinds in various circumstances, including ideas that are believed, is 
a function of the imagination in that broad sense. He introduces a 
narrower sense of ‘imagination’, which is the same thing ‘excluding 
only our demonstrative and probable reasonings’ [ Treatise  1.3.9.19n 
and 2.2.7.6n]. In that narrower sense, then, reason is opposed  to 
imagination, while in the broader sense reason is just another function 8of the imagination. The key puzzle that Peter was describing could be 
put this way: Hume says that there are ‘inferences’, or ‘reasonings’ 
(Hume uses both terms), that are ‘not determin’d by reason’, or 
‘founded on reasoning or any process of the understanding’. What 
could it mean to say that there are reasonings that are not determined 
by reason? I think he intends a conclusion in what we would now call 
cognitive psychology, about the causation of probable reasonings. In 
his conclusion about these particular inferences from experience, as 
elsewhere, ‘determined’ means: ‘caused by’.  So probable inferences, 
reasonings, exertions of reason, are not themselves produced by a 
process of mediating reasoning or inference. They are reasonings, all 
right; they just aren’t produced by a mediating piece of reasoning. 
 I think that the best way to see this is just to let the argument 
itself show you what the conclusion is supposed to mean. Here’s how 
the argument works: Hume points out that when we start making 
inferences from experience, what we have is experience of past 
constant conjunctions, plus a current impression, a sensation, or a 
memory. That’s where we start, and where we end up is with a belief in 
the occurrence of a new or further instance of a kind of thing that has 
been constantly conjoined with experienced objects like the one that 
is currently occupying our mind.  So there’s a sort of gap there from 
an experience of past constant conjunctions of A and B, plus a current 
A, to a belief in another B. He variously describes that transition as 
‘putting trust in past experience’, ‘presupposing the uniformity of 
nature’, and ‘making the presupposition that the future will resemble 
the past’. That’s the name of a little task, of a crucial transition that the 
mind makes, and the question is: how does the mind manage to make 
that transition? Here’s one theory he considers and rejects: perhaps it 
does it by reason . 
 Hume says: if reason determined us to make these inferences, it 
would ‘proceed upon the principle’ that nature is uniform. For what 
does reason do, after all? It produces conclusions by reasoning; 9it gives you a belief as the result of reasoning. So if reason is what 
engages us to make this transitional move, it would have to do it by 
giving us a belief  that nature was uniform, which we would then 
combine  with our past experience and our current impression and 
arrive at the ultimate conclusion in the new thing that we are now 
believing. The structure of his argument is: if that were  how we did it, 
by reason giving us a belief about the uniformity of nature, then the 
belief would have to result from either demonstrative reasoning or 
probable reasoning. Those are the only two kinds of reasoning. And 
yet it can’t possibly come from either kind of reasoning. I won’t go 
through the argument that eliminates those two kinds of reasoning, 
but it’s a really  good argument. That’s part of why this argument was 
so famous; even when people didn’t agree what the conclusion was, 
they could see that that bit was a really good bit. Hume’s conclusion 
is that we don’t make this transition by reasoning at all. We don’t do 
it by getting a belief as the result of reasoning about the uniformity of 
nature. We do it in some other way, without a belief in the uniformity 
of nature. We do presuppose  the uniformity of nature, but that just 
means we act as though  we were taking nature to be uniform, even 
though we don’t formulate that belief. Instead, the positive answer to 
‘how do we presuppose the uniformity of nature’ is that we do it as a 
result of a mechanism called custom or habit, which is a feature of the 
imagination in the narrower sense.  That’s the general mechanism by 
which things that are repeated many times then occur again without 
any further thought about them. It’s the same mechanism that makes 
\RXEUXVK\RXUWHHWKDWQLJKW7KH¿UVWWLPH\RXPLJKWKDYHJLYHQ
yourself a little argument, but now it’s just custom or habit. 
 Reason then has a kind of requisite sub-operation, this key 
transition that’s due to another faculty, the imagination. You might 
think of it as a subcontractor. Reason needs this transition made. It 
can’t make it by producing a belief in the uniformity of nature itself, so 
custom or habit performs the operation instead. An analogous point 10holds for ‘the senses’, which is our ability to get a belief in external 
bodies as a result of sensation. That process is what Hume calls an 
operation of ‘the senses’, but there is a particular crucial step in it, 
which is performed not by the senses but by the imagination in the 
narrow sense – that is, something to do with operations with ideas 
that are not reasoning [ Treatise  1.4.2.4-14]. In the same way, the 
customary transition that Hume describes in induction is due not to 
reason, but to the imagination in that narrow sense of some feature of 
ideas that is not itself demonstrative or probable reasoning. 
 As a claim in cognitive psychology, this is not itself an epistemic 
evaluation. It’s not telling you whether you should believe the inductive 
conclusion or not. It’s not saying whether it’s good or bad. But the 
claim does have logical implications and psychological consequences. 
It implies that a belief in the uniformity of nature couldn’t achieve 
worthiness to be believed, epistemic merit I’d say, through being 
produced by reasoning that’s independent  of presupposing the 
uniformity of nature, because Hume has shown that it can’t be 
produced that way at all. It therefore can’t get any warrant for being 
believed through  being produced in that way. It can’t be produced in 
WKDWZD\DQGWKDWVHHPVGLVDSSRLQWLQJ,WIHHOVOLNHDQµLQ¿UPLW\¶LQRXU
faculties, and it can contribute to an overall lessening of your degree 
of belief about things. When you recognize: ‘I thought maybe I would 
be able to do that sort of thing by reasoning, but I guess not’, that 
diminishes your own self-assessment just a bit. It also lends itself to 
an argument, which he offers in the Enquiry , that probable reasoning, 
induction, is a kind of instinct  in a way and, like other instincts, may be 
fallacious [ Enquiry  12.22]. You might notice that that is itself a sort of 
inductive argument: many instincts have been found to be fallacious; 
this one’s an instinct; so it too might prove to be fallacious, based on 
past experience. It doesn’t imply that the belief that nature is uniform 
lacks epistemic merit , though, or that it’s something that shouldn’t 
be believed, or in fact that it isn’t something that is probably true. It’s 11only a view about the lack of a reasoned belief in the uniformity of 
nature as part of the origin  of our probable inferences. The belief in 
the uniformity of nature isn’t something that people arrive at before  
engaging in induction. Given that they have already begun to engage 
LQLQGXFWLRQKRZHYHUWKH\FDQXVHLQGXFWLRQWRUHÀHFWWKDWQDWXUH
has been uniform in the past , so it will probably be uniform in the 
future . That argument doesn’t explain why they are inductive beings; 
they wouldn’t appreciate  that argument unless they were already  
inductive beings who were already  ‘presupposing the uniformity of 
nature’. But given that they are that kind of being, they can come to 
formulate that belief; and in fact, I think Hume thinks it’s not just 
pragmatically acceptable to think that nature is uniform I think he 
thinks it’s probably true  – that may be something stronger than what 
Peter thinks Hume believes about it; we’ll see.
2QH¿QDOTXHVWLRQLVWKHFODLPWUXH",FRXOGWDONDERXWWKDWIRUD
long time, but I’ll just say ‘yes’… [laughter] … Hume was exactly right. 
So for a long time there was this famous argument, which people felt 
was a great argument, but of course its conclusion was preposterous 
and false. I think it’s a great argument whose conclusion, understood 
the way I understand it, is important and true.
PM: Thank you very much, Don. Now, I’m going to oppose Don’s 
interpretation in various ways, but I’m not going to oppose everything 
he says. On the Uniformity Principle, for example, I think we’re 
absolutely at one. Likewise on custom and habit and so forth. The 
big difference between us is: what does Hume mean by ‘reason’? And 
therefore, what is the actual import of his conclusion? Now, what I 
want to suggest is that reason for Hume is the overall cognitive faculty, 
so it’s not just the faculty of inference. It’s the faculty for discovery, 
discernment, or judgement of truth and falsehood. 
 To back that up, I’ll start by citing a few quotations from people 
RIWKHWLPH7KH¿UVWLVIURP5LFKDUG3ULFH¶V Review of Morals ; I put 12KLP¿UVWMXVWEHFDXVHKH¶VQRW)UDQFLV+XWFKHVRQ«>ODXJKWHU@«µWKH
power within us that understands ; … the faculty … that discerns 
truth , that views, compares, and judges  of all ideas and things’ is 
WKHQLGHQWL¿HGZLWK reason  (and contrasted with sense ) [Price 1758, 
pp. 20-1]. Next we have Francis Hutcheson saying a similar thing 
in his Illustrations on the Moral Sense : ‘Reason is understood to 
denote our 3RZHURI¿QGLQJRXWWUXH3URSRVLWLRQV ’ [Hutcheson 1742, 
p. 215]. Shortly after this, Hutcheson outlines what he takes to be 
the standardly received faculty structure: at the top level we have 
reason  ‘presenting the natures and relations of things’, alongside the 
will which disposes us to act on what is presented as good or evil; 
then below these we have the senses  which ‘answer to’ reason  (also 
called the understanding ), and the passions  w hi ch  ‘ answ e r  t o ’  the 
will [Hutcheson 1742, pp. 219-20].  It’s striking that in four different 
works, either published or revised in 1742, Hutcheson inserted this 
sort of point on the structure of the faculties.  In 1740, he had received 
Hume’s Treatise , and I just wonder when he says: ‘Writers on these 
subjects should remember the common Divisions of the Faculties of 
the Soul’ [ ibid.], whether he might partly have been rapping Hume 
over the knuckles for playing fast and loose with reason and the 
imagination!
 This standard faculty structure involves a general divide 
between what we now call the cognitive  and the conative  realms .  
So you’ve got reason  and the will , where reason – also often called 
the understanding – basically perceives and judges the deliverances 
of the subordinate faculties (such as the senses) to discover, as 
Hutcheson puts it: ‘the natures and relations of things’. And once 
reason has discovered what is true, the will then makes decisions 
accordingly, depending upon what we want. So we’ve got a general 
GLVWLQFWLRQEHWZHHQWKHWUXWK¿QGLQJIDFXOW\RUIDFXOWLHVDQGWKH
purpose-giving side. And this is absolutely common to authors of 
that time: David Hartley, for example, says ‘The Understanding  is 13that Faculty, by which we … pursue Truth, and assent to, or dissent 
from Propositions’ [Hartley 1749, p. iii]. Now if we take a look at what 
Hume says about reason, we can see that it very much matches with 
this. I’m going to quote a passage from the Treatise  and one from 
each of the three works that developed out of the Treatise , which 
he described as ‘recast’ versions. In chronological order: ‘Reason is 
the discovery of truth or falshood’ [ Treatise  3.1.1.9]; ‘that faculty, 
by which we discern Truth and Falshood’ [ Enquiry  1.4 n., 1748/50 
HGLWLRQV@µ7KXVWKHGLVWLQFWERXQGDULHVDQGRI¿FHVRIUHDVRQDQGRI
taste are easily ascertained. The former conveys the knowledge of 
truth and falsehood’ [1751, Appendix 1.21]; ‘reason, in a strict sense, 
as meaning the judgment of truth and falshood’ [1757, 5.1]. They 
DOOORRNSUHWW\XQDPELJXRXVDQGWKH\¿WFORVHO\ZLWKZKDWSHRSOH
at the time are saying. Here’s another quotation from the Treatise  
[Appendix, paragraph 1]: ‘There is nothing I wou’d more willingly 
lay hold of, than an opportunity of confessing my errors; and shou’d 
esteem such a return to truth and reason to be more honourable 
than the most unerring judgment’. And there are various other 
places where Hume puts truth and reason together. So to sum up my 
¿UVWPDLQSRLQWXVDJHDWWKHWLPHVHHV reason  as the overarching 
cognitive faculty, with other subordinate faculties ‘answering’ or 
reporting to it. Thus the imagination, the memory, and the senses 
all report to reason, and reason makes the judgement of what is true 
and false.
 My second line of argument is to do with reason and the 
understanding. Now, Don appealed to John Locke, whose most 
famous work is the Essay concerning Human Understanding ; and 
this term ‘human understanding’ is used relatively uncontroversially 
by a whole host of people in a very broad sense. Like Locke’s Essay , 
we also have Hume’s Enquiry concerning Human Understanding , 
and Book 1 of the Treatise , entitled ‘Of the Understanding’. But then 
in that same Book we have lots of passages where Hume apparently 14treats ‘reason’ and ‘the understanding’ as absolutely equivalent. 
Some of these are:
… the next question is, Whether experience produces the idea 
by means of the understanding  or of the imagination; whether 
we are determin’d by reason  to make the transition, or by a 
certain association and relation of perceptions. [ Treatise  
1.3.6.4, my emphasis]
Here he’s using ‘the understanding’ early in the sentence and then he’s 
referring back to it using the word ‘reason’.
… the mind … is not determin’d by reason , but by certain 
principles, which associate together the ideas of these objects, 
and unite them in the imagination . Had ideas no more union 
in the fancy  than objects seem to have to the understanding , 
… [Treatise  1.3.6.12, my emphasis]
Just as he’s oscillating between the words ‘imagination’ and ‘fancy’ 
purely for the sake of elegant variation – I think it’s uncontroversial 
that the imagination and fancy are just different names for one and 
the same faculty – I think the same is clearly true here of ‘reason’ and 
‘the understanding’. There are at least two dozen Humean passages 
in a similar spirit [e.g. from Treatise  1.4.1.1, 1.4.2.46, 1.4.2.57], but 
perhaps the most interesting are a pair of footnotes, one of which was 
originally placed in Book 2 of the Treatise :
… when it [the imagination] is oppos’d to the understanding, I 
understand the same faculty, excluding only our demonstrative 
and probable reasonings. [ Treatise  2.2.7.6n]
Hume decided to move this into Book 1 while the Treatise  was in press, 15and when he came to do so I think that he looked at it and thought it was 
a bit inelegant – ‘the understanding, I understand’ – so he changed the 
wording, replacing ‘the understanding’ with ‘reason’:
… when I oppose it [the imagination] to reason, I mean the 
same faculty, excluding only our demonstrative and probable 
reasonings. [ Treatise  1.3.9.19n]
So again, it looks as though he thinks of ‘reason’ and ‘the understanding’ 
as completely interchangeable. Now if they are interchangeable, then 
that is a strong argument for a broad reading of reason  as the cognitive 
faculty as whole, rather than just inference.   
,DOVRWKLQNWKLV¿WVWKHORJLFRI+XPH¶VDUJXPHQWV'RQKDVDSSHDOHG
to the Treatise  argument on induction, but I think that’s the only one 
of the big arguments which really favours his interpretation. In the 
Treatise , Hume says, in effect: ‘the Uniformity Principle can’t be founded 
on demonstrative reasoning; it can’t be founded on probable reasoning; 
therefore it can’t be founded on reason’ – and as Don points out, that 
rather makes it look as though reason just is demonstrative reasoning  
and probable reasoning . But in the Enquiry  version, he also explicitly 
rules out intuition (twice) and I think he also deliberately rules out 
appeal to what the senses deliver (at quite some length), which suggests 
a broader view of reason. Another of his famous arguments is in Treatise  
1.4.2, on the external world, and contains passages like this:
This sentiment, then, as it is entirely unreasonable, must proceed 
from some other faculty than the understanding. …  So that upon 
the whole our reason neither does… [ Treatise  1.4.2.14]
Again we’ve got ‘the understanding’ and ‘reason’ being interchanged. 
But notice that he’s saying that because ‘this sentiment’ is unreasonable, 
it can’t come from reason.16… ’tis a false opinion … and consequently … can never arise 
from reason … [ Treatise  1.4.2.43] 
Again it looks as though reason is the cognitive  faculty – it’s the faculty 
by which we discern truth and falsehood. It’s not just the faculty 
of argument. Going back to the Enquiry  version of the induction 
DUJXPHQW,¿QGLWTXLWHVLJQL¿FDQWWRFRPSDUHWKLVZLWKDSDVVDJH
from the Letter from a Gentleman to his Friend in Edinburgh , which 
Hume wrote in 1745 at the same time as he was working on the 
Enquiry (which came out in 1748). He was in the country, and says in 
the letter words to the effect ‘sorry I haven’t got the Treatise  with me 
so I can’t quote page numbers, but let me outline the way these things 
are generally seen’. Then we get this:
It is common for Philosophers to distinguish the Kinds of 
Evidence into intuitive, demonstrative, sensible , and moral ; … 
[1745, paragraph 26]
‘Moral’ reasoning is probable  reasoning; ‘sensible’ evidence is sensory  
evidence. And those four types of evidence match up exactly with what 
he’s ruling out as potential supports of the Uniformity Principle in 
Section 4 of the Enquiry . So, in other words, I think that here Hume is 
seeing reason as the cognitive faculty, which handles the four different 
types of evidence, and he’s knocking out each of those in turn.
 Now if we examine the conclusion of the famous argument about 
induction, Don and I are actually both agreed, I think, that this 
statement from the Enquiry  is the most authoritative:
in all reasonings from experience, there is a step taken by the 
mind, which is not supported by any argument or process of the 
understanding  [ Enquiry  5.2]17DG: It’s a good one.
PM: Again we have a phrase, ‘not supported by any argument’, which 
sounds rather more epistemological than psychological. And ‘not 
supported by any … process of the understanding’ – so Hume is not 
only ruling out inference, by the looks of things. And I think Don has a 
ELWRIDGLI¿FXOW\KHUHHVSHFLDOO\ZKHQZHEHDULQPLQGWKDWWKHUHDUH
plenty of passages in Hume’s works where he refers to bad arguments 
[e.g. Treatise  1.2.4.11, 1.3.3.5 7, 1.3.6.9 10, 1.4.5.30; 1779, 9.2, 4, 11]. 
The point is that if Hume is doing what Don takes him to be doing, 
then he is trying to show that the Uniformity Principle is not, as a 
matter of cognitive psychology, founded on an argument , a stepwise 
inference . But in fact, he never deals with the case of a bad stepwise 
inference. If his hypothesis is what Don thinks, then he surely has 
to rule out the possibility of the Uniformity Principle’s being based 
on a bad argument. But he doesn’t even consider it. Now Don said – 
this was from earlier on – that according to Hume, there are only two 
kinds of reasoning: demonstrative reasoning and probable reasoning. 
But, in that case, Hume’s taxonomy has left out an awful lot because 
it has left out, for example, bad demonstrative arguments. These don’t 
count as genuinely demonstrative because they’re fallacious. But 
they’re not probable arguments either. And Hume, it seems to me, is 
in various places [ ibid.] quite clearly saying that there are would-be 
demonstrative arguments which genuinely count as arguments , but 
which are bad. And as construed by Don, Hume wouldn’t have ruled 
these out as possible sources for belief in the Uniformity Principle. So 
his argument, I think, would be seriously incomplete if he meant what 
Don takes him to mean.
 On the nature of Hume’s ‘scepticism’ that results from his famous 
argument, I think Don and I are very broadly agreed and I must 
acknowledge here a debt to him because in the Monterey debate that 
we had, and in the paper that came from that [Garrett 1998], Don drew 18attention to a very important passage from the beginning of Section 
12 in the Enquiry concerning Human Understanding , where Hume 
talks about different kinds of scepticism. He says that if you doubt 
your faculties right from the start (so-called antecedent  scepticism), 
if you’re not prepared to accept your faculties at all without a proof 
that they’re reliable, then you’ve had it, because without your faculties 
you’ve got nothing to do the proof with. And he goes on to say that we 
should only adopt a kind of consequent  scepticism, which is that we 
give default authority to our faculties until we’ve found a problem with 
them. Now I think that’s dead right. It’s now quite a keystone of my 
interpretation – and I’m grateful to Don for having drawn attention 
to that passage. So my line would be that ‘reason’, for Hume, is our 
default cognitive faculty. It has these four different types of evidence, 
and Hume is showing that none of them can lead to the Uniformity 
Principle. Like Don, I think it’s a good argument – but for slightly 
different reasons.
DG: We want to let people get a chance to ask questions, so I’ll limit 
myself to making a couple of statements. I don’t agree with everything 
Peter said. I grant that Hume roughly interchanges the terms ‘reason’ 
and ‘understanding’ in his writing. In fact in the Treatise , there is a 
passage I mentioned [ Treatise  1.3.9.19n)] in which he distinguishes 
reason  from imagination in the narrow sense as being our 
demonstrative and probable reasonings . But that’s an almost exact 
replica of a footnote he had earlier placed elsewhere in the Treatise  
[Treatise  2.2.7.6n], which says that imagination in the narrow sense 
is everything that is covered by imagination in the broad sense except 
demonstrative and probable reasoning, which is what constitutes 
‘the understanding’ . So there he characterises the understanding, 
too, as just being our demonstrative and probable reasonings. The 
understanding generally involves the intuition of self-evident truths 
as well as reasoning, but in many cases the difference between 19those two doesn’t really matter. In Locke, you had a broad sense of 
‘understanding’ and a narrow sense of ‘reason’, set out in a chapter 
called ‘Of Reason’ within a book  called An Essay Concerning Human 
Understanding . Peter thinks reason for Hume blew up  to cover 
everything that the Lockean understanding did, while I think that 
in Hume the understanding shrank down to encompass only what 
reason did, plus intuition. The view of a master cognitive faculty that’s 
a sort of spectator I think is the wrong way to think about cognition 
for Hume – it’s not a way he’d think about it given that he doesn’t 
really have a mental spectator, he’s just got a mind that is a bundle 
RISHUFHSWLRQV,Q/RFNHµXQGHUVWDQGLQJ¶LVGH¿QHGDVLWKHKDYLQJ
of ideas, which is now done by the imagination for Hume; plus  (ii) 
XQGHUVWDQGLQJWKHVLJQL¿FDWLRQRIVLJQVZKLFK+XPHVD\VLVUHDOO\
just a kind of probable causal reasoning; plus  (iii) inference, or the 
perception of relations among ideas. So I think there’s a natural story 
of how the understanding gets to be roughly equivalent to reason in 
Hume. I would note that Hume always distinguishes both memory 
and the senses from the understanding and at no point includes them 
in the understanding. Peter has a reading of the Enquiry  argument 
about induction according to which sensation is included in the 
understanding there, but I don’t think that’s right. I think Hume’s 
reference to sensation is part of what I called ‘the set-up’, explaining 
what we have before the transition occurs. It’s not playing a role in 
the explanation of the transition, and the statement that Hume gives 
at the very end of that section of what his conclusion has been doesn’t 
mention sensation at all, but only ‘argument’.
 Hume certainly does say that reason is something that enables us 
to discern truth and falsehood, but he doesn’t generally say that it’s 
the only  source. Memory, too, lets us know about truth and falsehood, 
for example. Reason, he wants to emphasise, concerns  truth and 
falsehood and not, for example, the rightness and wrongness of 
actions themselves. He does describe it at one point as ‘the discovery 20of truth and falsehood’, but he has already said that reasoning is 
always a ‘discovery of relations’ – so it’s a particular way  of getting 
truth and falsehood that’s a ‘discovery’ (that is, an ‘uncovering’) in a 
way that memory and sensation aren’t a discovery. Moreover, Hume 
calls reason the discovery and truth and falsehood in the very same 
section [ Treatise  3.1.1] in which he says that moral distinctions are not 
made by reason. Why not? Because they’re not made by demonstrative 
reasoning  and they’re not made by probable reasoning . I don’t think 
‘supported by’ is necessarily a term of epistemic evaluation for Hume. 
It’s like his general term ‘foundation’— a term he also uses in this 
connection — which is often very causal rather than epistemic. For 
example, superstition is ‘founded on’ fear. 
 ‘Inference’ or ‘reasoning’ doesn’t mean just any mental transition 
to assent; for example, Hume thinks sheer repetition in education gets 
you to assent, and that’s a kind of mental transition, but it’s not inference 
or reasoning. I think he really thinks that only demonstration and 
probable reasoning qualify as kinds of reasoning. He sometimes talks 
about ‘pretended’ demonstrations that are not really demonstrations 
and are not fully demonstrative reasonings, and he remarks that 
µGHPRQVWUDWLRQVPD\EHGLI¿FXOWWREHFRPSUHKHQGHGEXWFDQQHYHU
KDYHVXFKGLI¿FXOWLHVDVZLOOZHDNHQWKHLUDXWKRULW\RQFHWKH\DUH
comprehended’. That suggests that when you do understand genuine 
demonstrative reasoning, then you see that it can’t be wrong. Probable 
reasonings on the other hand can be bad. But all probable reasonings, 
good ones and bad ones, fall within the scope of Hume’s argument 
that all probable reasonings presuppose the uniformity of nature in a 
way that can’t be accounted for by any probable reasoning.
 Having said all this, here are two points of agreement –  so things that 
must be entirely right! I think we agree that the understanding, which 
is roughly reason – however big or small that is – has a proprietary  
function of reasoning, that is, it itself accounts for reasoning, and, as 
you put it, it takes input from the senses and memory….21PM: Absolutely.
DG: … I agree that reasoning operates on deliverances of the senses 
and memory – that’s part of Hume’s account of how probable reasoning 
is possible. So we agree about that. We’re disagreeing about whether 
reason encompasses  them by doing that. We also both agree that 
reason, or the understanding, can be subjected to criticism, and it is 
not just by GH¿QLWLRQ  a truth-generating faculty, so that it makes sense 
to ask whether we should rely on it, and whether it is or is not giving us 
the truth. We agree that it has a kind of default authority : you begin 
by being entitled to operate with it. But I think Peter’s view is that it is 
only by being part of the big understanding that a faculty can have that 
authority, for Hume, whereas I think that all of our belief-generating 
mechanisms – memory, the senses and reason in his narrow sense – 
all have that default authority themselves, so that they don’t have to 
get it from a larger understanding.
PM: I don’t want to hold up the questions, so I’m just very quickly 
going to answer a couple of small points you made, Don. Yes, we 
agree on the reporting to – but I’m not adopting the view that reason 
for Hume is some kind of spectator. It’s perhaps worth making that 
clear. Hutcheson hints at this faculty of ratiocination, so that when 
you’re constructing an argument it seems that you’ve got a sub-faculty 
that’s mixing your ideas around in such a way that you can see their 
relations, and reason is just a kind of viewer. Hume certainly doesn’t 
take that line. So, as you said, we agree that reasoning is a sort of 
proprietary function of reason proper.
DG: So there’s reason not to think he’s so Hutchesonian.
PM: The other point here concerns the relation between reason and 
the imagination – this is very tricky. Don was talking about the 22imagination playing the role as a subcontractor, as it were, for reason. 
Now I think that’s wrong. I think that’s making the faculties real 
entities in a way that Hume’s philosophy ought not to allow, because 
he’s very critical about faculty language if it claims to be explanatory. 
The way I’d go – and this is in some ways very similar to Don’s view 
but subtly different, I think – is that when he says inductive inference 
depends on the imagination (as he does in the Treatise , though not 
in the Enquiry ), what he means is not that reason is trying to do this 
inference and the imagination says ‘Oh! You can’t do that by yourself – 
let me lend a hand …’ No, what he means is that there is a sub-process 
in our reasoning faculty , which is imagination-like, which is not itself 
cognitive . It involves extrapolation, going beyond anything that we 
have cognised. And that, I think, is the way to understand Hume’s 
view. Now I think that when we iron all these things out, there’s not so 
much that separates Don and me on this, but there is a bit.
DG: So, one sentence – and then maybe you’ll do one word, and then 
one syllable, and then we’ll each do a letter… [Laughter] It’s fair enough 
to say that you don’t have to have judgement, the understanding, be a 
spectator, but I’m also not treating imagination and reason as talking 
to each other on the subcontractor model. Rather, my view is that if 
you want to know the answer to the question ‘was something done by 
reason as opposed to imagination in the narrow sense’, ask yourself: 
‘was it produced by demonstrative or probable reasoning?’ If not, then 
it’s not due to reason. And that’s why the imagination in the narrow 
sense is performing the customary transition. I would say that an 
advantage of my interpretation is that I don’t just have to say that that 
transition is ‘imagination-like’; I can say it was done, as Hume says, 
by the imagination.
PM: ‘Wrong!’ I’m only allowed one word, right? [Laughter]23SM: Are you ready to turn it over to the rest of us? Well, let me just 
ask you who or what reasons or has understanding and how far your 
interpretations imply or depend on a sense of self or identity (which 
we know also in Book 1 of the Treatise  is coming under scrutiny by 
the epistemological argument and the inductive method)? Is there 
a difference in how your approaches would deal with that question? 
You’ve had a lot of talk about reason, about the faculties, about 
reasoning – does there have to be, or what would it look like to be, the 
self that does that reasoning?
DG: I think we’re probably on the same page about that – we’ll see. I 
think we agree that Hume’s conception of the self or the mind is that 
it’s a bundle of perceptions; it is perceptions themselves, ideas and 
impressions, in causal relations with one another. There is no separate 
soul, no substance in which these perceptions inhere, no standing-aside 
spectator – which is not to say that ideas of ideas don’t occur.  Ideas of 
ideas do occur, but those are not viewed by a spectator. In that sense it’s 
a ‘no-spectator’ view. In order to explain why the mind has the powers 
that it does — and we’ve talked about faculties — I think we agree that 
Hume is quite happy to infer in general from A does something , to A 
has a power for doing it , to A has a faculty for doing it . That involves 
not treating powers as individual agents to whom things are to be 
ascribed. Locke makes a big point of denying that powers are ‘agents’, 
by which he means: things act because  of their powers, through  their 
powers; it’s not the powers  that act. Powers are not doers of things; 
things that have powers are doers of things with the powers that they 
KDYH6RZKHUHYHU\RXFDQ¿QGVRPHWKLQJEHLQJGRQHWKHUH¶VDSRZHU
or a faculty of doing it. It belongs to the self or the mind, which in the 
¿UVWLQVWDQFHLVWKLVV\VWHPRILQWHUUHODWHGSHUFHSWLRQV%XW,WKLQN
Hume is quite clear that it requires a physiological under-structure, 
a brain, to make these kinds of processes possible. He discusses that 
at some points. The only other thing I would say is that the argument 24about induction we are discussing is an argument that Hume gives 
before he tells you what he thinks the self is. In that sense, it shouldn’t 
depend  on his view of the self – but it should be consistent  with it.
PM: I would just add it’s also an argument he continues to give long 
DIWHUKHKDVORVWFRQ¿GHQFHLQKLVYLHZRISHUVRQDOLGHQWLW\7KLVLVTXLWH
a big difference between us. I think Don’s reading of the Treatise  view is 
more or less correct … I agree pretty much with it, barring a few details. 
But the fact is that Hume openly despaired of his theory of personal 
LGHQWLW\LQ2FWREHUEDUHO\WZHQW\RQHPRQWKVDIWHUKH¶G¿UVW
published it, and it doesn’t appear again. So I take the view that his later 
works are more authoritative. But, certainly, the argument had better 
be independent of that. Just one point I’d pick you up on, Don, is that I 
take Hume and Locke to be far less in favour of faculties than you do, I 
think. You said that if X does A, then X must have a power for A, which 
means X has a faculty for doing A. That implies straight away that I’ve 
got a faculty for producing bad would-be demonstrative arguments. I 
agree with you that such bad arguments are not demonstrative, just as I 
might say to a logic student, ‘that’s not a deduction’, meaning that’s not 
a valid  deduction. That doesn’t stop it being an argument . So if there 
are bad arguments, then we must have a faculty for producing bad 
arguments by the reasoning you just gave. So where does that belong 
then? Not part of reason, apparently, according to you. Well, I can quite 
happily exclude it from a proper functioning cognitive  faculty. But it’s 
not clear to me that you can exclude it if the faculty of reason is just the 
faculty of producing an argument. Here is an argument, and it’s been 
produced.
DG: It certainly is being taken  as an argument and there are processes of 
inference that are going on as part  of it, and then there’s also a bad part. 
The bad part is not some demonstration. It’s due to the imagination in 
the narrow sense. That’s my view and I’m sticking with it. [Laughter]25Q: I’m just wondering if you could say more how Lockean Hume is 
about reason. I mean, I’m thinking here about some of the arguments 
ZH¿QGLQ/RFNH¶VOHWWHUVWR6WLOOLQJÀHHWZKHUHKHJDYHDEHWWHUVHQVH
RIKRZIDUWKHVFRSHRIUHDVRQFDQJR<RX¿QGDEHWWHUSLFWXUHRI
what Locke thinks about substances, for instance, in his letters to 
6WLOOLQJÀHHWZKHUHKHVD\VWKDWHTXDOLW\FDQQRWH[LVWE\LWVHOIEXWZH
need to supply some substratum or some support. Reason can give 
us this idea of the support but I’m not sure Hume would be willing to 
accept that…
DG: Yes, Hume offers a criticism of Locke on a similar point.  Locke has 
an account of the origin of the idea of power in the Essay  according to 
which, if you read it the way Hume read it, you basically infer your way 
to having an idea of power from things that you observe. And Hume, I 
think quite astutely, notes that Locke himself had made it a principle 
in the Essay  that you could never acquire any new simple idea from 
reasoning. So if you’re proposing acquiring an idea just from reasoning, 
Hume certainly doesn’t think you can do that, and Locke shouldn’t 
think you can do that. Hume thinks he has discovered that all non-
demonstrative reasoning depends on this mechanism of induction, 
and that provides him with a way of delineating certain things as not 
capable of being produced by reasoning – because if it were probable 
reasoning you would have had experience of the one and of the other, 
constantly conjoined, and if you don’t have that, then there can’t be 
reasoning there. That might be overly strict, but that is his line.
Q: This is directed to Peter. You began with these quotations about 
UHDVRQEHLQJDWUXWK¿QGLQJIDFXOW\ZKLFK\RXIRXQGLQFRPPRQ
between Hume and some others in the eighteenth century ... I wasn’t 
quite sure what the point of putting Hutcheson in was. Is it because, in 
fact, he is writing prior to Hume (although you have a quotation from 
a later edition) …26PM: As I mentioned, it’s quite interesting that his four things that 
say most about the faculties are all dated 1742. One of them is the 
Synopsis of Metaphysics , another is his Short Introduction to Moral 
Philosophy , and the other two are a footnote and a paragraph in later 
editions of works of his. So I was speculating that it might even be that 
contact with Hume’s Treatise  caused him to do that…
Q: It could be for the Illustrations on the Moral Sense , but I doubt it 
would for the Synopsis ZKLFKLVDOPRVWFHUWDLQO\ZULWWHQ¿IWHHQ\HDUV
earlier.
PM: It’s hard to know because he added extra stuff in the other works 
so maybe he did in the Synopsis  – who knows?
Q: The Synopsis  was printed without his permission – he hadn’t 
passed it for press.
PM: OK, thanks – that’s a useful point, I’ll remember it.
Q: Anyway, that’s not the main point I wanted to bring up. It is that if 
you simply look at the logic teaching of the period, now this is strictly 
logic, logic as a curriculum subject in colleges, I’m pretty certain you 
ZLOO¿QGLWLQWKHORJLFGLFWDWHVWKDW+XPHZRXOGKDYHKDG8QGRXEWHGO\
the apprehension of truth is seen as the sole aim of logic, which proceeds 
by ratio . And there must be a legacy of that in Hume’s mind because 
WKLVZDVGUXPPHGLQWRKLPLQWKH¿UVWZHHNKHVWXGLHGSKLORVRSK\LQ
college.
PM: The Introduction to the Treatise  suggests that Hume saw Book 1 as 
a contribution to logic: ‘The sole end of logic is to explain the principles 
and operations of our reasoning faculty, and the nature of our ideas: 
Morals and criticism regard our taste and sentiments’ [ Treatise , 27Introduction 5]. It looks like he’s describing the contents of the Treatise . 
Now on that reckoning, logic  is basically to do with the understanding . 
And, of course, Locke’s Essay  was called logic  by lots of people at the 
WLPHµIDFXOWDWLYHORJLF¶DQGDOOWKDWVR,GRQ¶W¿QGWKDWDSUREOHP$QG
we shouldn’t be misled by the term ‘our reasoning faculty’: today, we 
naturally use the word ‘reasoning’ and we think of stepwise inference. 
But if you look in Johnson’s Dictionary  of 1756, all you get on reasoning 
is that, basically, it’s the operation of reason . If you’re looking for words 
that mean stepwise inference, it’s not ‘reasoning’, but ‘deduction’ or 
‘ratiocination’. And it’s not ‘argument’ either, because if you look at how 
Johnson talks about ‘argument’, it’s a ground of assent . So when we 
read Hume and see him saying ‘there is no argument’ of some kind, 
and we think that must mean ratiocination  – no, it doesn’t! At least, 
not according to Johnson’s Dictionary  and other sources. So I think 
it’s very dangerous to take these words and read them in the modern 
sense and assume they’re the same at that time. Anyway, I’m interested 
in that point about Hutcheson – I must chase that up! That’s grist to my 
mill. But the reason I quoted Hutcheson was partly because, obviously, 
+XWFKHVRQZDVDELJLQÀXHQFHRQ+XPH+XPHNQHZKLPDQGVRRQ
which makes it relevant; but the main thing is that his Synopsis  is by far 
WKHPRVWH[SOLFLWWKLQJ,ZDVDEOHWR¿QG,ZRXOGEHLQWHUHVWHGWRWDNH
\RXUDGYLFHRQRWKHUWKLQJVWKDW,FRXOG¿QG
Q: I think the logic tradition will give you plenty of ammunition, but it 
may be at the wrong point because they introduce reason right at the very 
EHJLQQLQJZKHQWKH¿UVWIDFXOW\RIUHDVRQLVWKHVLPSOHDSSUHKHQVLRQ
301RWKDW¶V¿QH7KDW¶VJULVWWRP\PLOO
SM: Do we have time to move on to causation?
DG: Well, I might suggest that I could do the introduction and you 28could present, and then I would waive my response and go directly to 
questions – inasmuch as I agree with most things you say but would 
add things to them.
PM: We could do that.
DG: Hume regards the relation of cause and effect as the master 
relation through which we try both to understand the world and to 
achieve our ends in it. His attempt to ‘fully explain’ it constitutes one 
of his best-known and most important contributions to philosophy. 
Yet the wealth of arguments and claims he offers have led to vigorously 
competing interpretations of what that explanation is  – a competition 
that has come to reach a peak in recent years.
2QWKHRQHKDQG+XPHRIIHUVZKDWKHFDOOVD¶SUHFLVHGH¿QLWLRQ¶
of ‘cause’ in terms of ‘constant conjunction’ (that is, the regularities 
ZHZHUHWDONLQJDERXW+HUH¶VWKHGH¿QLWLRQµDQREMHFWSUHFHGHQWDQG
contiguous to another, and where all objects resembling the former 
are placed in like relations of precedency and contiguity to those 
objects, that resemble the latter’ [ Treatise  1.3.14.30-31]. He goes on 
WRFLWHDQGHPSOR\WKLVGH¿QLWLRQDORQJZLWKDVHFRQGGH¿QLWLRQLQ
terms of mental association and inference, as an important part of 
his philosophical method. Thus, it seems that he is a reductionist, 
reducing the relation of cause and effect, by a method of meaning 
analysis, to nothing more than what he calls ‘constant conjunction’ 
between pairs of successive objects or events. This has come to be 
called the ‘Old Hume’ interpretation.
 Yet on the other hand, he goes on to allow that our ideas of this 
UHODWLRQDUHµLPSHUIHFW¶DQGWKDWERWKGH¿QLWLRQVPD\µEHHVWHHP¶G
defective, because drawn from objects foreign to the cause’ [ Treatise  
1.3.14.31]; moreover, he alludes variously to ‘the power by which one 
object produces another’ [ Treatise  1.3.1.1], the ‘internal structure or 
operating principle of objects’ [ Treatise  1.3.14.29], and ‘the ultimate 29connexion of … objects’, concluding that ‘we can never penetrate so 
far into the essence and construction of bodies, as to perceive the 
SULQFLSOHRQZKLFKWKHLUPXWXDOLQÀXHQFHGHSHQGV¶> Treatise  2.3.1.4] 
and that, more generally, ‘we cannot penetrate into the reason of the 
conjunction’  [ Treatise  1.3.6.15]. Thus, he seems to be a realist (though 
maybe a sceptical realist) about causation, allowing that there are or 
at least may be real—even if inaccessible to us – causal powers and 
relations that go beyond constant conjunction and our subsequent 
LQIHUHQFHDQGPHQWDODVVRFLDWLRQ7KLVLQWHUSUHWDWLRQ±ZKLFK¿UVW
blazed into new prominence (it’s not an entirely new interpretation) 
in the 1980s with books by John P. Wright [1983] and Galen Strawson 
[1989], among others – has come to be called the ‘New Hume’ 
interpretation and has often seemed on the verge of becoming a new 
orthodoxy.
 On yet a third hand (you didn’t know there were three hands!), 
however, Hume also holds that a ‘necessary connexion’ is required 
as an ‘essential … part’ of the relation of cause and effect [ Treatise  
1.3.6.3]. And his endeavour to discover the nature of our idea of this 
necessary connection and its experiential source in an ‘impression’ is 
ZKDWOHDGVKLPWRKLVWZRGH¿QLWLRQVDQGDWWKHHQGRIWKDWVHDUFKKH
declares that what we take to be such a ‘necessity and power [lying] in 
the objects’ is in fact merely an internal feeling of ‘the determination 
of the mind, to pass from the idea of an object to that of its usual 
attendant’, a feeling that the mind erroneously treats as a quality 
of the objects observed [ Treatise  1.3.14.25] even though the ideas 
derived from this feeling of determination ‘represent not any thing, 
that does or can belong to the objects’ [ Treatise  1.3.14.19]. Thus, it also 
seems that he denies that there are any such things as genuine causal 
relations of any kind in nature and is instead a projectivist, admitting 
RQO\¿FWLWLRXVSURMHFWLRQVRILQWHUQDOVHQWLPHQWVRQWRREMHFWVWKDW
FDQQRWJHQXLQHO\EHTXDOL¿HGE\WKHPDQGDOVRSHUKDSVH[SUHVVLRQV
of our own mental dispositions to make inductive inferences. This 30might properly be called the ‘Other Hume’ interpretation, which has 
been developed and defended most recently by Simon Blackburn 
[1993], Helen Beebee [2006], and Angela Coventry [2006].
 Peter has weighed in on this debate with two papers, one in a 
FROOHFWLRQRQWKH1HZ+XPHGHEDWH>@DQGDQRWKHU¿UVWSUHVHQWHG
at a conference I co-directed in New York which was then published 
in Mind  [2009], that constitute, I think, the most devastating case yet 
offered in defence of the Old Hume against the New. At the same time, 
I have been endeavouring to split the interpretive difference among 
proponents of the various Humes – offering conciliatory compromises 
to each and, perhaps, satisfying none. [Laughter] Still, I am hopeful 
that we, Peter and I, can, at least on some points, join forces. So I’ll let 
him loose his artilleries.
PM: Don and I agree about a lot when it comes to causation and 
Don’s made some very interesting contributions on the interpretation 
RIWKHWZRGH¿QLWLRQVDQGRIIHUVWKHVHFRQFLOLDWRU\QXDQFHV±EXW
unfortunately, we’re not going to be able to go there because we’re just 
going to have to concentrate on the big, rather crude picture.
 Traditionally, Hume’s been seen as a reductionist about causation, 
someone who says causation just ultimately comes down to regularities. 
And some people then say that he denies necessary connections. But 
he can’t do both! If he’s a reductionist, if he thinks causation is a matter 
of regularities, then he does  believe in necessary connections – but he 
thinks they just come down to regularities. That often puzzles people 
because they say that’s not what we mean by ‘necessity’. But Hume 
has another argument saying that this is what we mean by necessity; 
indeed it’s all we can mean. Now you may think it’s a crazy argument 
– and this is where I will put my cards on the table: I don’t think Hume 
is right, but I think it’s what he meant. And I think it’s pretty provable 
that this is what he meant. But against this, a lot of the argument for 
the New Hume goes like this: ‘Look, here’s Hume referring again and 31again to causes and powers and so forth. He must believe there are 
real causes and powers so he can’t be a reductionist.’ Sorry, he does  
believe in real causes and powers: but they’re to be interpreted in a 
reductionist manner. At least, that seems to be the obvious way of 
reading him.
 Hume starts from the empiricist assumption which he gets from 
Locke, and I think he hangs on to it far too grimly; that’s why I think 
the stuff on induction – which doesn’t depend on it – is a lot more 
powerful than the stuff on causation. His empiricism can be put pithily 
like this: ‘it is impossible for us to think of any thing, which we have not 
antecedently felt, either by our external or internal senses’  [ Enquiry  
7.4].  For example, you can’t think of the taste of pineapple until you’ve 
actually tasted pineapple, or think of the colour blue until you’ve 
seen the colour blue, and so on. So when we talk about a necessary 
connexion  or a power  or a force , there’s an idea. (And we could go into 
why Hume thinks these terms all signify essentially the same idea; 
I think he’s looking for a common element, the consequentiality  of 
one thing leading to another, that idea.) Where does that idea come 
IURP"2QKLVRZQSULQFLSOHVKH¶VJRWWR¿QGDQLPSUHVVLRQVRXUFHIRU
LW6RKHVHWVRIIWU\LQJWR¿QGDQLPSUHVVLRQ$QGIDPRXVO\KH¿QGV
the impression in constant conjunctions and our tendency to make 
inductive inferences. So when I see A followed by B again and again 
DQGDJDLQDQGWKHQ,VHHDQ$,MXVW¿QGP\VHOILQIHUULQJD%+XPH
says that that transition of the mind, that determination to believe in 
B having seen an A, that is the impression of necessary connexion. 
This seems very odd. An impression? An impression is supposed to be 
something like a feeling or an impression of sense, like the impression 
of blue when I see blue or the impression of anger when I feel anger. 
(The same empiricist principle applies to internal sensations: you can’t 
think of anger until you’ve felt it.) So when I feel anger, that’s a feeling. 
But when I’m inferring a B having seen an A, it’s not so clear that 
that’s  a feeling . I suspect that Hume is trying to shoehorn, as it were, 32WKHWUXWKWR¿WLQWRKLVWKHRU\6RKHFDOOVLWµDQLPSUHVVLRQ¶EXWUHDOO\
it’s not an impression. It’s more like the awareness of having made 
an inference , and I think that can make more sense of his theory of 
causation – but we can’t go there now.
 I’ve already mentioned some contributions of Don to this debate 
but I want to mention another. Don, in his book, drew attention to the 
IDFWWKDWWKHUHDUHWZRGH¿QLWLRQVRI virtue  or personal merit  in the 
moral Enquiry MXVWDVWKHUHDUHWZRGH¿QLWLRQVRIFDXVDWLRQLQERWK
the Treatise DQGWKH¿UVW Enquiry . One of them is:
every quality of the mind, which is useful  o r  agreeable  to 
the person himself  or to others, communicates a pleasure to 
the spectator, engages his esteem, and is admitted under the 
honourable denomination of virtue or merit.  [1751, 9.12, cf. 9.1]
Essentially, virtue  or merit  here is something that’s useful or 
DJUHHDEOH%XWWKHQWKHRWKHUGH¿QLWLRQLVYHU\GLIIHUHQW
The hypothesis which we embrace is plain.  It maintains, that 
PRUDOLW\LVGHWHUPLQHGE\VHQWLPHQW,WGH¿QHVYLUWXHWREH
whatever mental action or quality gives to a spectator the 
pleasing sentiment of approbation ; and vice the contrary.  
[1751, Appendix 1.10]
What’s going on here is that Hume says moral sentiments come from 
the sort of approbation we feel towards actions when we view them from 
an impartial point of view. So we see someone doing something good; 
PD\EHLWGRHVQ¶WEHQH¿WXVPD\EHLWHYHQEHQH¿WVRXUHQHP\EXWZH
think of it from an abstract point of view: ‘Ah, yes, that’s a good thing!’ 
We feel this characteristic sentiment of approbation. Until you’ve felt 
that sentiment, you don’t know what moral words mean; until you’ve 
got that impression, moral ideas will mean nothing to you. But Hume 33doesn’t stop there. He doesn’t just say ‘that’s what right and wrong is’. 
No; he goes on to look at all the things that we characterise as good and 
bad, as virtues or vices, and he systematises them – and then he says, 
‘Oh look! Virtually everything that we call virtue is useful or agreeable 
…’ But there are a few things that people call virtues that aren’t like that, 
WKHPRQNLVKYLUWXHVVXFKDVFHOLEDF\IDVWLQJSHQDQFHPRUWL¿FDWLRQ
self-denial, silence, solitude, etc. So what we do, is to take those from 
the catalogue of virtues and put them in the catalogue of vices [1751, 
9.3]. They’re not actually virtues, because they don’t match up to this 
characterisation that we’ve found. Now Don suggested, and I think he’s 
GHDGULJKWWKDWZKDW¶VJRLQJRQZLWKWKHGH¿QLWLRQVRIFDXVHLVYHU\
similar. There’s this characteristic inference, and you don’t know what 
causation  means, you don’t know what power  or necessity  mean, until 
you’ve been in the position of inferring B from A. That gives you the 
inferential bit: ‘Ah, I see! – that’s what it is to ascribe a cause: it’s to be 
prepared to infer one thing from another in this way.’ But then Hume 
says: now do it systematically . You should ascribe causes if, and only if, 
crudely, there’s a constant conjunction. There are lots of complications 
here, to do with the ‘rules by which to judge of causes and effects’ 
[Treatise  1.3.15], and searching for hidden causes, and various other 
complications – but we can’t go there now.
 In my view, the absolutely knock-down argument that Hume really 
does mean what he says when he advances this position – I mean, apart 
from the fact that he does actually say it – is in ‘Of the immateriality 
of the soul’ and ‘Of liberty and necessity’, two sections in the Treatise  
[1.4.5 and 2.3.1 respectively]. Basically, in both cases what he’s aiming 
to do is to say that causation, the same kind of causation that applies 
to billiard balls, applies just as much to the actions of human beings. 
6RLQWKH¿UVWFDVHLQµ2IWKHLPPDWHULDOLW\RIWKHVRXO¶KH¶VDWWDFNLQJ
people who say that the motion of matter cannot possibly cause thought 
because it’s just so different from thought: there’s no way thought can 
arise from that. And lots of people, including Locke and Clarke, used 34this for theological purposes, including the Cosmological Argument – 
they wanted to prove that there must be a thinking being responsible 
for all this, because if you didn’t have thinking to start with, it could 
never have come about from pure matter. In response to this, Hume 
says, ‘Many people think this is a strong argument. But actually it’s ever 
so easy to refute. Just think about what we know about cause and effect. 
Cause and effect is all about constant conjunction, and anything can 
be constantly conjoined with anything: in particular, motion can be 
constantly conjoined with thought. Oh – and it is! So ‘motion may be, 
and actually is, the cause of thought and perception’ [ Treatise  1.4.5.30]. 
That’s how he argues, very explicitly, in the last few paragraphs of 
section 1.4.5 of the Treatise . In ‘Of liberty and necessity’, he’s got a 
different target, namely, people who think that the kind of causation 
that applies to human beings is completely different from the kind of 
causation that applies to billiard balls. Again, a very quick answer: 
+XPHMXVWVD\Vµ:HOO\RXNQRZWKRVHWZRGH¿QLWLRQVRI³FDXVH´±WKH\
capture everything we can understand by a cause. And it all comes 
down to constant conjunction and inference. So now let’s look at the 
moral world, human behaviour. Oh, look! There’s constant conjunction, 
and there’s inference. It’s the same causation, exactly the same. And 
anyone who thinks that there’s some extra causation in physical things: 
they don’t know what they’re talking about! They haven’t even got an 
idea of what it is that they’re looking for.’ Given the way the texts go, 
these interpretative arguments seem to me to be pretty much knock-
down – and I think Don and I are agreed on that aren’t we?
Q: When I used to teach statistics to third-year students, I used to 
tell them that statistical constant conjunction was equivalent to a 
statistical correlation just to make a historical connection – I never 
actually checked whether that was right or wrong with a philosopher 
… But I think I used to say that necessary connection was a kind of 
mathematical process of deduction, so I was clearly wrong about that!35PM: Hume does recognise a conceptual necessity as well as causal 
necessity – but in simplifying, I was leaving that out. He does want 
to insist that there’s only one kind of causal  necessity, whereas his 
opponents, like Clarke, wanted to say there’s a difference between 
physical  and moral QHFHVVLW\2QHRIWKH¿UVWWKLQJVWKDW+XPHGRHV
ZKHQKH¶VJLYHQKLVWZRGH¿QLWLRQVLVWKDWKHVD\VKHUH¶VDFRUROODU\
there is no distinction between physical and moral necessity. But he 
leaves conceptual necessity intact. One can debate all sort of things 
about that too.
Q: So I wasn’t completely wrong? 
PM: No! [Laughter]
SM: Well, thank you very much. We’ll hope to continue discussion over 
some drinks next door and I do invite you to join us. I’m not going to 
adjudicate between reasoning and ratiocination [laughter] but we have 
most certainly seen a wonderful example of philosophical thinking in 
DFWLRQ7KDQNVYHU\PXFKLW¶VEHHQDWHUUL¿FGLDORJXH>$SSODXVH@
DG: Peter and I both thank the Institute for making this possible.
PM: Very much so! I have to say, it’s been wonderful, it really has, this 
week and on an earlier occasion too, debating with Don about all this 
for hours on end.
DG: We’ve been here for several days together… You might be able to 
tell… [Laughter]
PM: It’s been a wonderful opportunity.
DG: Yes, give us another week and we’ll solve everything!36 37Bibliography
Beauchamp, T.L. and Mappes, T.J. 1975. ‘Is Hume Really a Sceptic 
 about Induction?’, American Philosophical Quarterly  12, pp. 119-129.
Beattie. J. 1770. An Essay on the Nature and Immutability of Truth. 
 London: Edward and Charles Dilly.
Beebee, H. 2006. Hume on Causation . London and New York: 
 Routledge.
Blackburn, S. 1993. Essays in Quasi-Realism . New York: Oxford  
 University Press.
Coventry, A. 2006. Hume’s Theory of Causation: A Quasi-Realist  
 Interpretation . London: Continuum.
Flew, A. 1961. Hume’s Philosophy of Belief . London: Routledge and 
 Kegan Paul.
Garrett, D. 1997. Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy . 
 New York: Oxford University Press.
Garrett, D. 1998. ‘Ideas, Reason, and Skepticism: Replies to my Critics’,
 Hume Studies 24, pp. 171-194.
Hartley, D. 1749.  Observations on Man, His Frame, His Duty, and His 
 Expectations . Bath and London: Printed by S. Richardson; for 
 James Leake and Wm. Frederick. 
Hume, D. 1739-40 [2007]. A Treatise of Human Nature . Ed. D. F. 
 Norton, M.J. Norton. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hume, David. 1745. A Letter from a Gentleman to his Friend in 
 Edinburgh . Edinburgh: [s.n.]. 
Hume, D. 1748 [2007]. An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding .
 Ed. P.J.R. Millican. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hume, D. 1751 [1998]. An Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals . 
 Ed. T. L. Beauchamp. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Hume, D. 1757 [2007]. A Dissertation on the Passions and The Natural  
 History of Religion . Ed. T.L. Beauchamp. Oxford: Clarendon Press.38Hume, D. 1779 [1947]. Dialogues concerning Natural Religion . Ed. 
 N. Kemp Smith, 2nd ed. London: T. Nelson.
Hutcheson, F. 1742. An Essay on the Nature and Conduct of the 
 Passions and Affections. With Illustrations on the Moral Sense,
 3rd ed. London: A Ward.
Hutcheson, F. 1744 [2006]. Synopsis of Metaphysics , in F. Hutcheson, 
 Logic, Metaphysics, and the Natural Sociability of Mankind . 
 Ed. J. Moore and M. Silverthorne. Tr. M. Silverthorne. Indianapolis:
 Liberty Fund.
Hutcheson, F. 1747 [2007]. A Short Introduction to Moral Philosophy. 
  Ed. L. Turco. Tr. anonymously from Philosophiae Moralis Institutio 
 Compendiaria , 2nd ed. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund.
Locke, J. 1690 [1975]. An Essay concerning Human Understanding.  
 Ed. P.H. Nidditch. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Millican, P.J.R. 1995. ‘Hume’s Argument Concerning Induction: 
 Structure and Interpretation’, in David Hume: Critical Assess- 
 ments . Ed. S. Tweyman. London and New York: Routledge, pp. 
 91-144.
Millican, P.J.R. 1998. ‘Hume on Reason and Induction: Epistemology
  or Cognitive Science?’ Hume Studies 24, pp. 141-159.
Millican, P .J.R. 2002. ‘Hume’s Sceptical Doubts Concerning Induction’, 
  in Reading Hume on Human Understanding . Ed. P.J.R. Millican. 
 Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 107-173.
Millican, P.J.R. 2007. ‘Against the New Hume’, in The New Hume
 Debate . Ed. R. Read, K. Richman, rev.ed. London and New York:
 Routledge, pp. 211-252.
Millican, P.J.R. 2009. ‘Hume, Causal Realism, and Causal Science’,
 Mind  118, pp. 647–712.
Price, R. 1758. $5HYLHZRIWKH3ULQFLSDO4XHVWLRQVDQG'LI¿FXOWLHVLQ
  Morals . London: Millar.
Stove, D.C. 1973. Probability and Hume’s Inductive Scepticism . 
 Oxford: Clarendon Press.39Strawson, G. 1989. The Secret Connexion: Causation, Realism, and 
 David Hume . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Wright, J.P. 1983. The Sceptical Realism of David Hume . Manchester:  
 Manchester University Press.  40