Learning from 300 Years of Hume  
Peter Millican, Hertford College, Oxford  
 
1.  Dinosaurs , Antiquarians, and Traditional Teaching  
Why, as we celebrate the  300th anniversary of his birth , do we still study David Hume’s 
philosophy?  Hume wrote copio usly on man y things, including economics, p olitics,  
psychology , religion , and especially history .  Yet few historians – either students or academics 
– now read Hume’s monumental History of England , unless they are historiographers , 
concerned with the development of h istorical writing itself.  Even  fewer economists – as 
opposed to  scholars of the history of  economic thought – pay any attention to Hume’ s Essays , 
and m ost of them never even engage with  the writings of Adam Smith, widely recognised as 
the greatest foundin g father  of the subject , who se work built in so many ways on that of  his 
close friend Hume.   Psychology, again, is now well -established as a n experimental science, 
with little serious scientific interest remaining even in the once -influential theories of S igmund 
Freud, let alone the much earlier psychological discussions of Hume’s Treatise  and 
Dissertations .  So why do philosophers – including philosophers of political thought  and of 
religion  – continue to study Hume so intently?  Are they just dinosaurs wh ose lack of new 
ideas condemns them to rehashing forever the same old stuff?  Is there really no progress in 
philosophy?  
 More specific  questions can be asked of historians of p hilosophy, who are typically  also 
active philosophers in their own right.  Gran ted, they have a specialist interest in the history of 
the discipline, earning (at least some of) their bread by exploring the past, and teaching and 
publishing their discoveries.   No doubt there is plenty more to learn here, extending the 
“canon”  by scour ing libraries, physical or virtual , for old texts whose place in the history of 
thought might be unjustly neglected.  But does anyone really need to research Hume’s Treatise  
and Enquir ies any more?  Haven’t these been adequately worked over for centuries, dozens if 
not hundreds of tim es?  And what do historians of p hilosophy think they  are doing, when they 
keep coming up with “novel interpretations” of Hume’s thought?   If Hume couldn’t write 
clearly, then why on earth is he accorded such respect?  And if he  could  write clearly , then 
surely by now we must know what he said .  So isn’t it about time that people stopped trying to 
dream up new ways of reading into his texts (rather than from  them)  innumerable  ideas that he 
didn’t express himself , and the majority  of which must surely misrepresent his thought ? 
 Such doubts about the history of philosophy might provoke some concern even about 
our traditional  teaching practices, whereby students are introduced to standard philosophical 
issues through the writings of the “great, dead philosophers”.  This does have  an obvious point 
when so much of our terminology is infused with allusions to the philosoph ers who first 
developed familiar positions  (e.g. “Cartesian dualism”, “Berkeleian idealism”, “Humean  2 scepticism”).  B ut such terminology could  easily be taught with little reference to the original 
writings, by presenting simplistic caricatures that will often be quite adequate for the purpose 
of broadly outlining those familiar options  (and may, indeed, be more  reliable  as a guide to 
ordinary  non-specialist philosophical parlance) .  So is there really any great value  – beyond 
deference to tradition – in requiring students to engage seriously  with the classics, when even 
specialist scholars seem to have such difficulty in  going beyond the se broad outlines and 
agreeing in detail what our  great predecessors were actually  saying?  
 All thes e are good questions, likely to occur to any critically -minded person who 
ponders the place of classic authors  in the research and teachin g of contemporary p hilosophy.  
Here I am  focus ing on Hume, but of course s imilar questions could be asked, perhaps  even 
more pointedly , about the an cient sages Plato and Aristotle  with their two thousand years of 
secondary literature .  And there are plenty of other s in the philosophical pantheon  – Descartes, 
Hobbes, Locke, Leibniz, Berkeley, Kant, Hegel, Mill, Frege, Wittgenstein, and the rest  – who 
could also be thought to have attracted  far more than their fair share of study and  scholarship .  
Nevertheless  Hume has a special status, probably honoured more widely (at least at the present 
time) than any of these others amongst  aestheticians, epistemologists, metaphysicians, moral 
philosophers, philosophers of religion, and philosophers of science , not to ment ion secularists 
and humanists .  So there is good reason to focus on him  here, quite apart from his tercentenary . 
2.  Difficult Questions and Evolving Disciplines  
The first point to make in reply  concerns the nature of p hilosophy, which almost by definition  
focuses on difficult  questions, whose methods of solution – let alone the answers suggested – 
are typically debatable and conceptually unclear .  Thus a t the time  he wrote them , Hume’s 
psychological explorations in the Treatise , like the ideas in his essay s on economics, came 
under the heading of “moral philosophy”, the philosophy of the human world.  He was  
breaking new ground, developing concepts and methods that would be built on by later 
generations of thinkers.  But once these later thinkers had establ ished new disciplines on those 
foundations, future work in psychology and economics ceased to count as part of “philosophy”.  
Thus  the questions that we continue to call  “philosophical” are typically those that have not yet 
been solved, and wh ose very meth od of solution is open to live debate.  There are , of course,  
plenty of difficult questions in biochemistry , say .  But the concepts  involved and the general 
methods  of addressing tho se questions are well  understood, and hence biochemists do not 
spend their  time worrying about the appropriateness of the laboratory work that occupies most 
of their time.  Physicists, by contrast, get much closer to philosophy, when they venture to 
speculate about the origin of the universe, the apparently indeterminate nature of the quantum 
world, multiple universes, and so forth: all areas where conceptual problems loom large  and it 
remains very unclear how far experimental investigation  can take us.   Hence there are plenty of 
specialist philosophers of physics, as well as phy sicists with philosophical interests.  A similar 
point would apply t o much of computer science  and the multi -disciplinary area known as 
cognitive science , both young disciplines with huge amounts of new territory to explore and  3 concepts to develop.  Econom ics is a very different case, firmly established institutionally with 
an orthodox mathematical methodology, yet arguably on flimsy foundations.  Recent events 
have convinced many that this emperor is at least partially naked and needs  re-clothing ; the 
philosophy of economics  is consequently on the rise.  
 It is important to recognise, then, that progress by philosophers  does not necessarily 
register – at least to the outside observer – as progress in philosophy .  And progress by 
philosophers has in fact been monumental by any standards.  The great intellectual 
developments that created the modern world were driven by  philosophers , most  obvious ly in 
the political , economic,  and religious arena s (consider , for instance, Locke’s influence on the 
USA constitution, Rousseau’s on the French Revo lution , the advoca cy of free trade by Hume, 
Smith  and Ricardo, and the attacks  of Hume, Voltaire and others on religious dogmatism ).  But 
the same is true in  physical science also: t hus Bacon paved the way for experimental 
investigation of the natural world , Descartes and Leibniz were brilliant mathematicians and 
physicists , and even Kant  – though his main interests were metaphysical – developed the now -
dominant nebular hypothesis of the  formation of the solar system , putting man firmly  in his 
post-Copernican place.  This “natural philosophy” was seen as  broadly  continuous with the rest 
of their work, well before the familiar  divide came to be  drawn, between speculative 
“philosophy” and empirical “science”.   Descartes now continues to be thought of  as a 
“philosopher” because his metaphysical views remain interesting, while his physics was 
ultimately eclipsed by Newton.   In contrast, Newton himself  (along with  Galileo, Boyle  and 
others ) moved from the status of  “natural philosopher” to “scientist”, because his contributions 
to mathematical physics proved so vastly  more significant than his efforts  elsewhere.  
 Even amongst this impressive company, Hume ca n claim as high a place as any, his 
position enduringly secure both as a “philosopher” and a seminal pioneer of the “science of 
man”, which since his time has grown hugel y in many of the directions that he was the first to 
advocate and explore.  All well and good, you might say  – we can agree that Hume himself  was 
no dinosaur – but why does this give us any reason to study him now, other than from historical 
interest?  Psychologists who want to understand  the human mind , for example,  surely have no 
need now to study Hume’s works, or to fight again the battles that he helped to wi n for them.  
They will instead follow the spirit  of his philosophy, relying on the empirical investi gation that 
he himself so ardently insisted was  the only route to knowledge of the world (or of ourselves ).  
In many areas of psychology, all this is true enough, but there are other areas  – particularly in 
the vicinity of the new multi -disciplinary field known as cognitive science  – where things are 
far less straightforward, and where thinking through Hume’s problems, in his way, can open 
our minds to new ideas that could prove genuinely fruitful.  Thus Jerry Fodor has recently 
found inspiration in Hume’s theory of ideas and faculties , writing a book called Hume 
Variations  (2003) which argues  that: 
Hume is remarkably perceptive about the components and structure that a theory of mind requires.  
Careful study of the Treatise  helps us to see what’s amiss with  much twentieth -century philosophy 
of mind, and get on the right track.   (Fodor 2003, cover blurb)   4 Perhaps surprisingly, going back to a philosopher of the eighteenth century turns out to be 
useful for inspiring new thoughts ( even within a field that d idn’t exist in his day)!  Fodor finds 
Hume helpful when pushing at the boundaries of our understanding into what he takes to be 
poorly understood phenomena.  And this illustrates again how it is typically in the conceptually 
problematic areas, where diffic ult problems arise without established methods of solution, that 
there is a need for the kind of thinking that philosophy especially cultivates: analytical and 
critical , yet imaginative and open -minded to new – and to old  – approaches.  
3.  Fashion and Forg etfulness  
Even in relatively straightforward areas, going back to the classic philosophers can be useful to 
remind us abou t things that were once well understood but have been widely forgotten .  
Because philosophy is so focused on controversial and concept ually difficult areas, those 
questions that remain within its scope (and are not exported to the special sciences that it 
spawns) commonly provoke strong advocacy and debate, while lacking  the sort of empirical 
anchoring that would dampen the influence of prevailing currents of thought.  So philosophy is 
highly subject to trends and fashions, bringing a serious risk that important lessons will be 
forgotten and  will have to be re -learned  again and again if insufficient at tention is paid to its 
history.  In r ecent debates about the so -called “hard problem” of consciousness, for example, it 
is frequently claimed that any physical explanation of subjective experience must  be 
impossible on principle.  This is essentially the same point that was repeatedly urged a gainst 
Thomas Hobbes – the materialist “monster of Malmesbury” – by many philosophers of the 
seventeeth  century, a debate on which Hume expressed important new insights in his 
discussion of “the immateriality of the soul” in his 1739 Treatise .  It can be  almost painful to 
see so many philosophers now discussing these things, typically quite oblivious of the valuable 
lessons that could be learned from such older literature.  
 But fashion  can bring benefits as well as costs , as long as the lessons of previous 
fashions  – both positive and negative – remain available to study and recall .  The confidence 
and group interactions that come  from being part of a bandwagon can push things forward with 
an energy that would otherwise be difficult to harness, and progress tends to be much faster if, 
for a time at least, inhibiting quibbles and sceptical worries are quietly ignored.  An example 
from the heart of theoretical philosophy is the current fashion for armchair metaphysics, 
apparently attempting to establish truths about the world in a largely  a priori manner that Hume 
would have considered utterly impossible.  My own suspicion is that this fashion will fade 
once its apparent successes prove to be insecure, but I fully expect  that it will bear lasting fruit 
in other ways, by exploring new byways that woul d not have opened up without that  initial 
ambition.  Who knows how fertile  these might prove to be in the future, or in what direction?  
And even if they do not, the very prominence of the bandwagon has provoked criti cal scrutiny 
and a new field of study – metametaphysics  – whose aim is to question the foundations of 
metaphysics.  Here Hume’s  writings can c ontinu e to provide nourishment for  the sceptic, not 
just as historical documents, but as sources of live  arguments  that retain considerable force .   5 Whether believers or sceptics triumph within these debates, new insights are likely to arise  
(including on the strength of Hume’s critical views) , and some positions will be established 
more securely, or at  the very least, the options clarified.  
 A contrasting  example comes from  economics, a field now generally regarded as 
independent , but widely informed by a philosophical v iew of human nature – as both perfectly 
rational and perfectly self -interested – which Hume (and Smi th) would have considered a  
fantasy .  Here the bandwagon has become  established orthodoxy, generating huge quantities of 
theoretical results which  have proved valuable in many area s, though less so in others.  Recent 
events at least suggest that the time i s ripe for review , and for more open -minded investigation 
of alternative approache s, as exemplified by the rise of  so-called “b ehavioural”,  
“experimental” , and “agent -based”  economics.  But suppose this suggestion were to be 
oppo sed on principle by an orth odox economist , on the grounds that the core of his theory  is 
palpably true: that we do in fact universally act so as to maximise our perceived “utility”.  
When challenged over some apparently altruistic behaviour – a woman volunteering to nurse 
the victims of an earth quake, say – his response is to assert that the apparently selfless outcome 
must, after all, be something that the woman desires, and hence counts as a component of her 
own utility.  She might appear  to be acting for others, but in reality  she is just seek ing the 
satisfaction of her own desires, and hence maximising her own personal benefit, just as much 
as any avaricious financier.  Here is a clear case where appeal to Hume can helpfully remind us 
of things that were once better understood.  First, we can attack this “selfish hypothesis ” with a 
vigorous thrust of the analytical tool known as “Hume’s  Fork ”:  Is the claim that we act so as 
to maximise our utility sup posed to be a relation of ideas – a mere consequence of the way the 
terms are defined – or a matter of fact?   If it is a relation of  ideas, then “utility” is simply being 
used to mean whatever is the target of our actions, in which case it cannot also mean personal 
benefit: there is no contradiction  in our desiring someone else’s benefit for its own sake (as any 
parent knows).   If, on the other hand, the claim is understood as a matter of fact, then it can 
only be decided by empirical investigation, and whether the nurse who helps earthquake 
victims is motivated by self -interest or by genuine altruism is a matter of her psychology, not 
something that  can be determined a priori by the tautologous observation that she desires what 
she desires.   This argument ought to be decisive, but i f further persuasion is needed, Hume 
again provides it, appealing to the earlier arguments of Joseph Butler to highlight  the key point : 
It has been prov’d [by Butler] that even the Passions, commonly esteem’d selfish, carry the Mind 
beyond Self, directly to the Object; that tho’ the Satisfaction of these Passions gives us Enjoyment, 
yet the Prospect of this Enjoyment is not  the Cause of the Passion, but on the contrary the Passion is 
antecedent to the Enjoyment, and without the former, the latter could never possibly exist . 
(E 1.14, note in 1748/50 editions; cf. M Appx 2.12)  
So those who account for human behaviour exclusive ly in terms of a desire for personal 
pleasure are putting the cart before the horse.  It might be that the nurse gets pleasure from the 
recovery of her patient, but if so, that is clearly because she first desires his recovery.  The 
fulfilled  desire  is wha t generates the pleasure , and to suppose the reverse  is to adopt a 
manifestly  ridiculous model of human motivation: of a self -interested nurse who, though she 
has not the slightest concern for the patient himself, somehow inexplicably gains pleasure from  6 his recovery , anticipates doing so , and plans accordingly .  On this model, we never act at all 
from a direct desire for any  outcome beyond personal pleasure .  All the time, we are 
calculating  to maximise our envisaged pleasu re, somehow anticipating that thi s will 
mysteriously arise from certain outcomes, even though we are entirely indifferent to those 
outcomes themselves.  Quite apart from the absurd  motivational psychology here, the picture 
of humans as constantly calculating rather than  directly  desiring outcomes  is implausibly 
rationalistic, as Hume observes with a characteristic move  of his own : 
Animals are found susceptible of kindness, both to their own species and to ours; nor is there, in this 
case, the least suspicion of disguise or artifice.  Shall  we account for all their  sentiments too, from 
refined deductions of self -interest?  Or if we admit a disinterested benevolence in the inferior 
species, by what rule of analogy can we refuse it in the superior?   (M Appx 2.8)  
Plenty of people, both before D arwin and since, have espoused theories of human nature that 
would take us out of the natural world  into some theoretical wonderland.  Hume continues to 
provide a valuable (and elegantly written) corrective, his arguments remaining as pertinent as 
ever the y were.  We need not be surprised to learn that Darwin was reading Hume on “The 
Reason of Animals” (in the first Enquiry ) at the  time when he devised  his theory of evolution 
by natural selection.  
 Thus the writings of classic philosophers can usefully remi nd us of worthwhile views 
and arguments that might otherwise be lost in the flow of fashion.  In the specific case we have 
just considered, no doubt  these points could be preserved  without reference to Butler and 
Hume, by simply cataloguing – in textbooks or encyclopaedia articles – their key observations 
and arguments that show crude “psychological egoism” to be a hopeless theory of human 
motivation.  But quite apart from the aesthetic and cultural loss involved in this unhistorical 
approach, it will fail with philosophical trends that are relatively subtle and less specific, and 
which involve the application of common ideas, themes, and techniques to a wide range of 
complex and conceptually tricky issues.  Here the value of older currents of thought can be  
fully maintained only if they are kept alive through active engagement, rather than merely 
recorded as positions frozen in time.  And it is in this spirit that Fodor (as we saw earlier) 
comes to Hume, finding in him a champion for conceptual atomism  again st the dominant 
pragmatism  and holism  of Wittgenstein, Quine and others.  
 To sum up so far, there is indeed real progress in philosophy, but often manifesting  
itself within other  disciplines.  Also, th e resulting  movement can be in a direction that later 
needs to be rethought, especially in difficult, conceptually unclear areas, where the ultimate 
destination can be impossible to predict in advance.  In these cases, keeping older patterns of 
thought a live is valuable for the future  as well as for our apprec iation of the past, enabling us to 
avoid being blinkered by whatever happens to be the dominant fashion.  Furthermore, a  writer 
like Hume is worth reading for the elegant  beauty of his prose, even when he is expressing 
familiar truths that could be learned  elsewhere.   In his philosophy of religion, for instance , the 
artfully written Dialogues concerning Natural Religion  remains an essential resource  for the 
wonderful way in which it expresses a range of interacting lines of thought  which still retain 
their force, and are  ultimately devastating to the (then universally respected) Design Argument  7 for God’s existence.  Admittedly,  a new element has recently been added to this debate, in the 
form of the “Fine -Tuning Argument” which appeals to the apparent “anthr opic coincidences” 
in the values of the physical constants that structure the universe.  Here one must indeed go 
beyond Hume, but for the reader wanting to get to grips with the pros and cons of the 
traditional argument – including many points that can app ly equally to the Fine Tuning 
considerations – there is no better teacher.  His treatment of the Problem of Evil in Parts 10 and 
11 of the Dialogues , for example, still deserves recommendation as  essential reading  for any 
student , and no scientific advance will depose it from that position . 
4.  Squabbling Scholars  
This br ings us  to my second set of initial questions, addressed to Hume scholars in particular.  
If Hume’s writing is so wonderful, then how is it that there can be such disagreement over his 
meaning?  And if it is so lucid, then how can it permit such a vast ran ge of “interpretations” , or 
demand such continued intense study ?  Here views may well  differ considerably among 
scholars, so I shall just give my personal perspective.  First, I believe that the proliferation of 
interpretations that currently exists is a s ign of the relative immaturity of the field, rather than a 
permanent state.  For most of the time since Hume wrote, his philosophy has been subject to 
caricature and distortion by friends and foes alike, either intent to find their own views in his 
canonic al texts (e.g. the Logical Positivists) or else to ignore his unpalatable principles (e.g. 
Christians or others , offended or frightened by his various sceptical arguments).  Serious, 
careful Hume scholarship is relatively recent as a widespread  phenomenon,  and when in 2000 I 
put together a “Critical Survey of the literature on Hume and the First Enquiry ”, aiming to 
select and discuss around 250 of the most useful secondary works, I was struck by the 
disproportionate volume  of good material  from just the pre vious decade.  Certainly there is 
excellent scholarship  from relatively early in the twentieth century , such as the well -known 
books by Charles Hendel, Norman Kemp Smith, and John Passmore .  But in general, serious 
attempts to grapple carefully with Hume’s  texts on their own terms have dramatically 
proliferated over the last 30 years.  T his trend has  also been hugely facilitated more  recent ly by 
the availability of searchable electronic texts , both of Hume himself and others , removing  any 
excuse for hand -waving generalities that fail to stand up to detailed scrutiny.  Now, when a 
scholar claims that Hume means this or that by some key term, it is open to all  – even the 
novice research student – to search quickly through the relevant text s and check that the claim 
makes sense.  So I trust that it will come to be seen as a routine professional  expectation, when 
interpretative claims are presented  in any serious scholarly work , to back them up with a 
precision and thoroughness that would have been impossible in previous generations for all but 
the most devoted specialists . 
 My own primary ambit ion as a Hume scholar  is, as far as possible , to find The Truth  
about what Hume thought;  and althou gh lack of evidence sometimes makes this impossible, in 
many cases it see ms perfectly  realistic .  So I expect that over time, many current interpretations 
will be refuted and disappear, narrowing considerably the range of seriously considered views.   8 To take a specific example, Hume’s essay “Of Miracles” – in which he argues th at no report of 
a miracle can  ever provide  a rational foundation for religious belief  – has generated a  
surprising diversity of  interpretation s.  Not only have scholars often misunderstood  key terms 
(e.g. “law of nature”, “miracle”, “proof”) in ways that c an be decisively  refuted;  many have 
also appeal ed to an implausible  variety of  supposedly suppressed premises or lines of 
argument, often with scant solid evidence in the text.  Many of these, I suspect, have been 
motivated by a n underlying  desire to rende r Hume’s argument either compelling or clearly 
refutable , according to the analyst’s prejudice .  But i n any case, I believe that seriously close 
attention to Hume’s text delivers a clear  verdict on most – though not all – of the key 
interpretational questi ons that have been raised about “Of Miracles” , and I expect  that this will 
be increasingly recognised.   The upshot is to reveal Hume’s argument as being far better than 
his critics allege, while at the same time ultimately flawed.  But discovering exactly how it is 
flawed, and thinking carefully through its twists and turns, is itself a wonderful learning 
experience, delivering insights beyond those that are directly conveyed by Hume’s words.  
5.  Defensible Diversity  
This last point helps to explain why – even after clearly refutable interpretations have been 
rejected – there will always remain room for multiple “readings” of the text.  When the text is  
itself ambiguous or indeterminate , or leaves logical gaps , or merely provokes objections , 
scholars will ha ve different preferences for how these issues are best to be resolved.  Further 
indeterminacies will arise from divergence between Hume’s language and our own, most 
obviously if our language is not English, or if the meaning of specific words has evolved s ince 
his time.  More subtle indeterminacies can emerge through  the development of new 
philosophical concepts, requiring Hume’s thought to be “translated”  (one might sometimes say 
“shoehorned”)  into categories rather  different from his own.   Making sense of  Hume’s talk of 
mental faculties  such as “reason” and “the imagination” , for instance , requires careful 
interpretation , because he shares Locke ’s scepticism  about faculty language , and yet several of 
his most central arguments  (e.g. on induction, the exter nal world, and the basis of morality)  are 
couched in faculty terms .  In struggling to understand what he means, we have to  think things 
through in our own minds, informed as these may be by knowledge o f the contemporary 
categories not only of philosophy bu t of cognitive science  and psychology .  So even if we 
aspire only to follow Hume’s own engagement with the problems  – let alone to build further on 
his thoughts  – we have little choice but to attempt  such “translation”.  Of course there is a 
sense in which  this process  involves a distortion of his thought, but such distortions are entirely 
legitimate  as long as we retain a clear understanding of what it is we are doing , and do not 
allow this to obliterate the faithful memory of (our best understanding) of what Hume is up to 
in his own terms . 
 It follows from this  that interpretations of Hume will, quite legitimately, vary over time, 
and not only because scholars learn more about Hume himself.  Even when our understanding 
of Hume has indeed moved forward, high quality older work (such as H.  H. Price’s 1940 book  9 on Hume ’s Theory of the External World ) can retain a distinctive value precisely because  it 
views him through spectacles tinted with the fashions of the time, giving later readers an 
appreciation of  unfamiliar aspects of his thought .  Inevitably, those who are  immersed in the 
thought of a particular period will focus on elements of Hume’s philosophy  – including themes 
and subtle textures within it – that harmonise or are made vivid by their own particula r context.  
Thus when atomism has been in  fashion, scholars have recognise d more easily  (and been 
accordingly inspired by)  the aspects of the Treatise  that chime with that; when naturalism 
became all the rage, a different set of connections began to be app reciated  which  might  
previously have been entirely overlooked .  This again shows how the coming and going of 
trends in philosophy, though incompatible with the steady, forward progress commonly 
expected in the sciences, can also bring complementary advanta ges.  To expect such steady 
progress across the board would anyway be unrealistic: as we saw earlier, philosophical 
questions are typically different from those of the special sciences precisely because  they have 
no established method of solution.  Our que stions are also difficult and often conceptually 
obscure: hence it is humanly impossible to foresee, or even to recognise, all of the connections 
that might prove fruitful in the future, and often one has to “think oneself into” a position 
intensively and over time before one becomes able to envisage most of  its range of 
possibilities .  So trends and fashions are indeed only to be expected, but  notice here how a n 
enduring  focus on the texts of the “great, dead, philosophers” , so far from rooting us 
immovabl y in the world of those classic thinkers,  can also surprisingly play a quite different  
positive role.  Without my interest in Hume , I might never have read Price’s views on 
perception and “sense data” .  Through his book , the greatest philosopher of the eighteenth  
century  has thus provid ed a connecting thread through which the insights of a  different  period – 
the early twentieth  century – can be conveyed forward even to those who have no special 
interest in that period.   
 The case of miracles again  provides  a nice example  of several of these  points .  I believe 
that Hume’s argument for the famous  “Maxim”  that ends Enquiry  10 Part  1 is based on a 
presupposition which  fails,  but Hume’s own attitude to this presupposition  is very unclear, 
partly because its failure is highlighted by his own argument  (as well as by what he goes on to 
say in Part  2).  I do not think Hume himself fully understood the logic here, partly because he 
declined to approach  it in the mathematical terms suggested by his contemporary opponen ts 
George Campbell and Richard Price , an approach which has since  become standard  with the 
growth  of probability theory .  Those who now study Hume on miracles are therefore likely to 
be brought into contact with these later developments, as well as the obj ections that build on 
them.  In con sidering a response to the se objections  on Hume’s behalf , I find myself preferring 
to adjust his Maxim to focus on the probability of true or false testimony being given  rather 
than on the probability of given testimony b eing true or false .  This is all in a fully Humean 
spirit, but I do  not pretend that  it is exactly what he meant.  It has led me to think of these 
issues in a different way, a nd were I now asked to present my own  case against miracles, I 
would seek to  integrate what I have learned from his essay  with material from his Natural 
History of Religion , as well as from recent literatur e in the psychology of religion  to which I  10 was drawn  by this investigation.   Other interpreters would , no doubt , have formed differ ent – 
but perhaps  equally legitimate – preferences  in response to similar  discoveries , and one can 
learn greatly both about Hume and about philosophy  through seeing his  issues explor ed in a 
variety of ways , both over time and through the involvement of a v ariety of scholars with 
different emphases.  
 Yet another source of legitimate variation in approach  derives from the changes in 
Hume’s position in his various works .  Many scholars prefer to focus on the view of his 
youthful Treatise , attracted by its syst ematicity and complexity, but some of us prefer to 
wander  more widely .  For example, my own research has led me to believe that in many 
respects Hume’s first Enquiry , though more limited, is philosophically stronger than Book  1 of 
the Treatise  on most of t heir common  topics.  Meanwhile, Jackie Taylor has done much to 
establish the second Enquiry  as importantly different from  Book  3 of the Treatise , and in 
philosophically valuable ways.  Very  recently , my graduate student Amyas Merivale has 
argued that Hume’ s Dissertation on the Passions , though generally considered a lightweight 
pastiche, in important respects represents a philosophical improvement on  Treatise  Book  2.  
Clearly there is room both for research that addresses the Treatise  exclusively on its own  terms, 
as well as research that attempts to identify the settled views of the mature philosopher.  
6.  Living Humeanism  
Of course there is also plenty of room for debate , for strong disagreement and attempted 
refutation.  Personally , I have probably learne d most from Don Garrett’s sustained and 
unfailingly ingenious attempts to find truth and sound logic in virtually all of the Humean 
positions  he discusses , often reaching a convincing interpretation but sometimes less so.  Even 
when I remain unconvinced,  almost invariably I have found that my understanding both of 
Hume and of the philosophical issues  has been enriched by the experience of engaging with 
Don’s work.   In relation to  Hume’s philosophy of induction, for example, I used to think that 
his use of t he term “reason” is simply ambiguous, an orthodoxy that Don has long disputed.  
My quest to  refute Don’s  “univocal” reading  has led  – through careful study of  the writings of 
Hume’s contemporaries as well as his own  – to a more nuanced view, understanding his core 
notion of reason as signifying our faculty of cognition , but accordingly  giving rise to  various 
related senses of the word (rather than a crude ambiguity ).  This in turn has led me to rethink 
my own view on inductive scepticism, so that I have gai ned philosophically from this 
interaction with Don’s view.  Such  enrichment is made possible by  our shared i nvolvement 
with Hume’s interests , not only as historical scholars but  also as actively committed 
philosophers.  
 All this helps to explain why histor ians of philosophy (or historically -minded 
philosophers) tend to focus so much on the established  canonical figures of the past rather than 
spending their time scouring libraries for forgotten heroes.  We want to deepen our 
understanding of philosophy , as well as of the past, and we are characteristically motivated by 
philosophical fascination with the issues even more than by historical curiosity.   With Hume,  11 these two combine very well, because his thought is generally so logical, insightful and 
profound that engaging with it deeply can provide valuable lessons and new inspiration to each 
succeeding generation.  Philosophers as diverse as John Mackie (attacking religion and moral 
objectivism), Peter Strawson (on free -will and scepticism), David Lewis (with  his “Humean 
mosaic”), Annette Baier (interpreting reason as social and passionate), and Simon Blackburn 
(proposing a “quasi -realist” account of morality and much else) have found fertile seeds in 
Hume’s philosophy.  Nor does one have to be a “Humean” to l earn from him, because even 
when he makes mistakes  – and I think he makes a fair number – these are typically 
illuminating, and one can learn as much philosophically here, from teasing out exactly where 
the error lies, as one can elsewhere, from following his limpid prose through convincing 
arguments that invite no objection and harbour no hidden difficulties.   There can of course be a 
tension between the desire to be faithful to Hume’s thought, and the desire to understand the 
philosophical problems he dis cusses.  But it is vital to notice that the se two imperatives can 
also reinforce and assist each other.   Hume is a towering genius, one of the greatest 
philosophers the world has known, and hence understanding what he himself thought provides 
one of the be st ways of learning about philosophy.  To learn most from him, we need to 
understand him properly , which requires meticulous scholarship and sensitive awareness of the 
currents of the time.   Very often, I have found that the position thus revealed – divest ed of 
anachronistic misinterpretation or simplification – is far more subtle and interesting than it 
initially appeared, so the time -consuming scholarship yields real philosophical benefits.  In the 
other direction, when we are faced with interpretative di fficulties, one of our very best 
resources is our own understanding of the relevant philosophy and of the logic of his 
arguments.   Someone who tries to read Hume but who lacks such understanding  will miss 
many of the best clues to what is going on in his t exts, typically resulting in implausible or 
shallow interpretation.   So deep, first -hand philosophical engagement is essential for grappling 
with Hume’s ideas.  
 Much of what I have said here could be applied more generally, and I expect  that my 
colleagues who work o n the latest metaphysics find similar riches in exploring and mutually 
debating the writings of, say, David Lewis.  But this might again prompt the question: why 
bother with Hume at all when there are so many more u p-to-date philosophers to study ?  By 
now, though, some answers should be apparent .  First, Hume is a giant of philosophy, of whom 
there are all too few, and we cannot afford to neglect their precious insights by devoting all our 
energies  to recent philosophers who might shine with modis h lustre, but have yet to pass the 
test of time.  Secondly, the sheer difficulty of the enduring philosophical questions, and the 
ubiquity of philosophical fashion – with its tendency to promote  eager communal discussion 
within a framework of shared assump tions – give ample reason to avoid  complacently taking  
for granted that c urrent approaches are the best.  Innovative s tudy of the history of philosophy 
keeps a rich variety of  frameworks alive and under active development, often seeking out 
imaginative  ways of combining the old with the new.  It can also provide a more balanced 
perspective on current orthodoxies , for those who might otherwise be carried along by the 
hubris of the crowd to dismiss alternative approaches, conveniently forgetting the long hist ory  12 of discarded enthusiasms .  Secure building for the future requires learning from the past, and 
the h istory of philosophical fashion  surely demonstrates  very clearly the folly of putting all 
one’s eggs into the currently popular  baskets .  Indeed in the long-term, it  is very much in the 
interest even of those now at the vanguard, that future  generations of philosophers should take 
their  history seriously!  
7.  Serendipity and Connections  
The unpredictable nature of philosophical progress  also suggests an  important role for 
serendipity , the way in which interesting ideas can turn up unexpectedly, and chance 
observations or associations can prompt fruitful enquiries  (perhaps quite distinct from the 
intentions of the relevant texts) that would otherwise not ha ve taken place.   One famous 
example is Einstein’s recollection of studying Hume’s Treatise  “with eagerness and admiration 
shortly before finding relativity theory”.  Einstein did not approach Hume’s text as a scholar, 
but his understanding of its  “positivi sm … was of great influence”  and even “suggested 
relativity theory” .  Such serendipity  can occur with all sorts of reading, including of recent 
philosophers , but a particular virtue  of going back to much earlier  texts  is that doing so forces 
us systematica lly to reinterpret our own ideas in their terms (or vice -versa), providing an 
especially fertile source of novel connections.  As we saw earlier, this effect can  be amplified 
all the more if our study brings us into contact with high-quality secondary lite rature that views 
those familiar texts from a range of quite different perspectives.  For ex ample, I recently 
undertook a detailed study of Hume’s theory of relations and his Fork, trying to understand 
what lay behind the change in his logical terminology between his youthful Treatise  and the 
later Enquiry .  This involved some detailed scholarship – tracing Hume’s  theory back to Locke, 
for instance  – together with a fair bit of logical and philosophical analysis, trying to understand 
fully his reasons for s aying what he did, and considering what other influences might lie behind 
the evidence of his text s.  But when I came to think through a range of potential problem cases 
for Hume’s Fork, including first -personal experience and  Kripke’s “necessary a posteri ori 
truths ”, this led me into a wide variety of material , both old and recent, primary and secondary, 
and thus brought  into view  combinations of ideas that otherwise probably I would never have 
juxtaposed.   This sort of experience will be familiar to many historians of philosophy, who 
typically find their vision  enlarged, rather than narrowly focused , by their study.  Related to 
this, a final  distinctive virtue of studying classic philosophers  can be the sheer sweep and 
ambition of their systems.  Hume enco urages his reader to see connections between logic and 
psychology, metaphysics  and the theory of motivation, speech -acts and political obligation, 
aesthetics and morality, religion and the passions, even free-will and history.  Working on 
Hume is thus one of the least specialist “areas of specialisation”  that one can have, because any 
scholar who aspires to understand him deeply  must maintain at least a significant interest in all 
of these areas.  And as should by now be very clear, engaging with his philos ophy is itself a 
creative and imaginative process that inevitably involves both grasping his ideas and building 
beyond them, just as much as it would in the case of contemporaries of our own such as David 
Lewis.   Hence maintenance of these various Humean i nterests implies wide philosophical   13 engagement.  The uninitiated might expect historians of philosophy to form an isolated ghetto 
of crusty, myopic,  time-bound, antiquarian  scholars, but at least in the area of Hume studies, 
things are not like that at all . 
 Finally, a  related point can be made at the undergraduate level, where study of the 
history of philosophy has the distinctive virtue of encouraging students to see the philosophical 
“big picture”, understanding positions  on different topics as hanging t ogether rather than 
independent.  Descartes and Hume, for example, have radically different views on causation, 
free-will, God, scepticism, science, and a host of other topics including the ethics of belief.  
Appreciating how  all these are interconnected, one can learn far more about philosophy – and 
about the potential implications of philosophical commitments  – than one could by studying 
the topics in isolation.   For many students, also, the act of engaging with an historical figure, a 
real person who was  trying to sort out all these problems  for himself within a single coherent 
world -view , is likely to make the study more vivid.   When that figure is as stylish and 
influential as Hume, there is also personal reward to be gained in the literary enjoyment of  his 
work, and in the achievement of solid historical knowledge about a major influence on our 
culture.   Engaging with and understanding a specific text likewise has a reassuring solidity, 
making it easier for student s to gauge their  progress, and providin g a tangible focus  (or even 
sometimes a helpful crutch)  when philosophical abstraction gets too confusing.  The 
widespread  prominence  of the canonical texts also implies  a huge and varied resource of 
secondary literature at all levels – both in print and o n the Web – for support and further 
nourishment.  All of these points are relatively familiar, and the place of Hume’s texts in 
philosophical education  has long been firmly established.  But I hope that what I have said here 
has been persuasive in making t he case for his permanent importance in philosophical research  
and scholarship  also, quite independently of that educational role.   If this case is accepted, 
moreover,  then it makes the case for teaching  Hume yet more compelling, when even today’s  
philosop hical research  literature will – quite rightly – continue to orientate so of much its 
discussion around his enduring legacy.  
 
This is a lightly edited version of the 2011 Bentham Lecture, delivered at University 
College, London on 24th November, and devote d to Hume in his  tercentenary year.   The 
paragraphs on undergraduate teaching (the third and the last) were omitted from that talk.  