VOX | T he STudenT  JOurnal  Of POliTicS , ecOnOmicS  and PhilOSOPhy                                                                                                                                     i SSue XV - S ummer  2011 
9“Is Hume a sceptic about induction?”  
This may seem to be a fairly straight -
forward question, but its appearance 
is misleading, and the proper response 
is not to give a direct answer, but           
instead to move to a more fundamen -
tal question which is suggested by 
Hume himself at the beginning of his 
definitive discussion of scepticism in 
Enquiry  Section 12: “What is meant 
by a sceptic?” ( E  12.2).  His point 
here is that “sceptic” can mean many 
things, and what counts as “sceptical” 
will often depend on the relevant con -
trast.  Someone who is sceptical about 
morality or the existence of God, for 
example, need not be sceptical about 
the external world.  And someone who 
is sceptical about the rational basis of 
inductive inference need not be scepti -
cal at all – in the sense of dismissive or 
critical – about the practice itself.
This crucial point about the varie -
ties of scepticism is often overlooked 
in discussions of Hume on induction, 
generating a great deal of misunder -
standing.  Commonly the debate will 
be framed in terms of a simple contest 
between “sceptical” and “non-scepti -
cal” interpretations.  Then on the one 
side, a case is made drawing on Hume’s 
famous negative argument which ap -
parently denies induction any basis in “reason”.1  Meanwhile, on the other 
side, appeal is made to the wealth of 
evidence from Hume’s writings as a 
whole (including the Treatise , Essays , 
Enquiries , Dissertations , History , and 
Dialogues ) that evince a clear commit -
ment to induction, and even reveal 
their author to be a fervent advocate 
of inductive science.  The evidence on 
each side is then judiciously weighed, 
and an appropriate conclusion drawn 
depending on which way the balance 
falls.  But this whole procedure is mis -
directed, because once we recognise 
the varieties of scepticism, it becomes 
clear that these two bodies of evidence 
are not in conflict .
Hume’s argument concerning 
induction is indeed a sceptical argu -
ment – in the sense of showing that 
inductive extrapolation from observed 
to unobserved lacks any independent 
rational warrant – but this is entirely 
compatible with his wholehearted en -
dorsement of such extrapolation as the 
only legitimate method for reaching 
conclusions about “any matter of fact, 
which lies beyond the testimony of 
sense or memory” ( E 12.22).  The two 
may initially seem incompatible, but 
if so, this is because we are taking for 
granted that a method of inference is
 1 The argument appears in Treatise  1.3.6, Ab-
stract  8-16, and Enquiry  4.Is Hume an InductIve  sceptIc ?
By Dr Peter MillicanVOX | T he STudenT  JOurnal  Of POliTicS , ecOnOmicS  and PhilOSOPhy                                                                                                                                     i SSue XV - S ummer  2011 
10to be relied upon only if it can be given 
an independent rational warrant.  And 
one of the central messages of Hume’s 
philosophy is that this assumption 
is itself a rationalist prejudice that 
we should discard, even though it is 
shared by both the Cartesian dog -
matist and the extreme “Pyrrhonian” 
sceptic.  In the contest between those 
two extremes, the Pyrrhonist “seems to 
have ample matter of triumph” while 
he “justly” urges Hume’s own “scepti -
cal doubts” of Enquiry  4 (the famous 
argument which is then summarised 
at E 12.22).  However the appropriate 
response, as Hume himself explains, is 
not to follow the dogmatist in vainly 
attempting to challenge the argument 
that yields these doubts, but rather to 
ask the Pyrrhonist: “ What his meaning 
is?  And what he proposes by all these cu -
rious researches? ”  What, after all, does 
he really expect us to do in response to 
this sceptical argument, even if we ful -
ly accept it?  Is he seriously proposing 
that we should stop drawing inferences 
about the unobserved?  That would be 
obviously absurd:
“a Pyrrhonian  … must acknowledge, 
if he will acknowledge any thing, that all human life must perish, were his 
principles universally and steadily to 
prevail.  All discourse, all action would 
immediately cease; and men remain in 
a total lethargy, till the necessities of 
nature, unsatisfied, put an end to their 
miserable existence.”  ( E 12.23)
Theoretically the Pyrrhonist might 
try to deny any such disastrous conse -
quences, on the ground that if induc -
tion is unwarranted, then we have no 
good reason for supposing that hu -
man life will indeed perish in these 
circumstances.  But Hume suggests 
that even the Pyrrhonist – whatever 
his theoretical commitments – will be 
quite unable to insulate himself from 
such common-sense beliefs: “Nature is 
always too strong for principle.  … the 
first and most trivial event in life will 
put to flight all his doubts and scru -
ples, and leave him the same, in every 
point of action and speculation” with 
the rest of us.
 Hume cannot, of course, prove  
that putting total scepticism into prac -
tice will lead inevitably to disaster, 
at least not to the satisfaction of the 
Pyrrhonist who consistently refrains 
from induction.  Nor can he prove  that 
common life will always trump scep -
tical principle.  But if in fact  Hume’s 
inductive conclusions about human 
psychology are correct, then he does 
not need to prove these points to any 
such opponent:
“Nature, by an absolute and uncon -
troulable necessity has determin’d us to 
judge as well as to breathe and feel; nor 
VOX | T he STudenT  JOurnal  Of POliTicS , ecOnOmicS  and PhilOSOPhy                                                                                                                                     i SSue XV - S ummer  2011 
11can we any more forbear [making in -
ductive inferences], than we can hinder 
ourselves from thinking, as long as we 
are awake, or seeing the surrounding 
bodies, when we turn our eyes towards 
them in broad sunshine.  Whoever has 
taken the pains to refute the cavils of 
this total scepticism, has really disputed 
without an antagonist, and endeavour’d 
by arguments to establish a faculty, 
which nature has antecedently implant -
ed in the mind, and render’d unavoid -
able.”  ( T 1.4.1.7)
So if in fact the sceptic’s doubts will 
be spontaneously “put to flight” as 
soon as common life intrudes, then 
Hume’s point is practically successful 
even if theoretically unproved.  And 
recall again that Hume himself need not 
be committed to accepting only what is 
theoretically provable  – that is the very 
prejudice which he is aiming to under -
mine.
 Hume’s subtle approach to scepti -
cism is made harder to appreciate by 
the vigour and rhetoric of some of his 
negative arguments and conclusions 
(especially in the Treatise , where his ul -
timate position on scepticism remains 
relatively obscure), but also, I suspect, 
by the widespread tradition of ap -
proaching scepticism initially through 
Descartes’ Meditations .  Descartes 
sees the sceptic as an opponent to be 
refuted outright, through rational ar -
gument of such overwhelming force as 
to be immune to any possible doubt.  
He thus takes on the onus of provid -
ing an ultimate justification of human 
reason, with any ineradicable doubt telling in favour of his sceptical oppo -
nent.  Hume succinctly points out the 
fundamental flaw in this approach im -
mediately after having raised the ques -
tion “What is meant by a sceptic?” at 
the beginning of Enquiry  Section 12:
“There is a species of scepticism, anteced -
ent to all study and philosophy, which is 
much inculcated by Des Cartes  …  It 
recommends an universal doubt … of 
our very faculties; of whose veracity … 
we must assure ourselves, by a chain of 
reasoning, deduced from some original 
principle, which cannot possibly be fal -
lacious or deceitful.  But neither is there 
any such original principle, which has a 
prerogative above others, that are self-
evident and convincing:  Or if there 
were, could we advance a step beyond 
it, but by the use of those very faculties, 
of which we are supposed to be already 
diffident.  The Cartesian  doubt, there -
fore, were it ever possible to be attained 
by any human creature (as it plainly is 
not) would be entirely incurable; and 
no reasoning could ever bring us to a 
state of assurance and conviction upon 
any subject.”  ( E 12.3)
Such antecedent scepticism  is utterly un -
workable, because in refusing to trust 
VOX | T he STudenT  JOurnal  Of POliTicS , ecOnOmicS  and PhilOSOPhy                                                                                                                                     i SSue XV - S ummer  2011 
12our faculties from the start, we are 
denying ourselves the only tools that 
could possibly provide any solution.  
The proper alternative, Hume seems 
to be saying, is to accord our faculties 
some initial default authority, and to 
resort to practical scepticism about 
them only “ consequent  to science and 
enquiry”, in the event that those inves -
tigations reveal their “fallaciousness” or 
“unfitness” ( E 12.5).  Thus the onus is 
shifted onto the sceptic to give reasons 
for mistrusting our faculties, and in the 
case of induction, that onus is at best 
only partially fulfilled.  Admittedly,
“The sceptic … seems to have ample 
matter of triumph; while he justly in -
sists, that all our evidence for any mat -
ter of fact, which lies beyond the tes -
timony of sense or memory, is derived 
entirely from the relation of cause and 
effect; that we have no other idea of 
this relation than that of two objects, 
which have been frequently conjoined  
together;2 that we have no argument to 
convince us, that objects, which have, 
in our experience, been frequently con -
joined, will likewise, in other instances, 
be conjoined in the same manner; and 
that nothing leads us to this inference 
but custom or a certain instinct of our 
nature; which it is indeed difficult to re -
sist, but which, like other instincts, may 
be fallacious and deceitful.”  ( E 12.22)
But this result gives no practical ba -
2 This is the summary of the Section 4 argu -
ment alluded to earlier.  Note, however, that 
the previous clause brings in a point from the 
Section 7 discussion of the idea of necessary 
connexion, which does not feature in Section 
4 itself.sis for scepticism.  Certainly it raises 
a ground for theoretical concern, and 
highlights “the whimsical condition 
of mankind, who must act and reason 
and believe; though they are not able, 
by their most diligent enquiry, to sat -
isfy themselves concerning the foun -
dation of these operations” ( E 12.23).  
But unless we are in the grip of the 
rationalist prejudice that Hume re -
jects, we should not see this lack of 
theoretical satisfaction as sufficient 
reason to abandon our only respect -
able method of inference about the 
unobserved.  That would be – as we 
have seen – to take the sceptical con -
siderations to a ridiculous (and anyway 
unachievable) extreme.  Instead, the 
appropriate response is less dramatic 
but far more valuable: to recognise our 
“whimsical condition” as a ground for 
modesty about the depth and extent of 
our powers, and to adopt a “mitigated 
scepticism” which is correspondingly 
diffident and cautious ( E 12.24), and 
which confines our attention to the 
subjects of common life, “avoiding 
distant and high enquiries”:
“While we cannot give a satisfactory 
reason, why we believe, after a thousand 
experiments, that a stone will fall, or 
fire burn; can we ever satisfy ourselves 
concerning any determination, which 
we may form, with regard to the origin 
of worlds, and the situation of nature, 
from, and to eternity?”  ( E 12.25)
This sentence is Hume’s last word on 
the question of inductive scepticism, 
and as we have seen, it represents VOX | T he STudenT  JOurnal  Of POliTicS , ecOnOmicS  and PhilOSOPhy                                                                                                                                     i SSue XV - S ummer  2011 
13the conclusion of a coherent line of 
thought which can be traced from the 
beginning of Enquiry  Section 12, his 
most clear and explicit – and repeat -
edly refined – treatment of scepticism.
Bibliography
Hume, David (1739-40), A Treatise of Human 
Nature: A Critical Edition , vol. 1, eds David 
Fate Norton and Mary J. Norton (Oxford, 
Clarendon Press, 2007) (“ Treatise ”, references 
indicated by “ T”)Hume, David (1740), Abstract  of the Treatise , 
included with both the Treatise  and Enquiry  
editions listed here (“ Abstract ”, references indi -
cated by “ A”)
Hume, David (1748), An Enquiry concern -
ing Human Understanding,  ed. Peter Millican 
(Oxford, Oxford University Press, 2007) (“ En-
quiry ”, references indicated by “ E”)
____________________________________
Dr Peter Millican is the Gilbert Ryle  
Fellow and Tutor in Philosophy at    
Hertford College, University of Oxford.
The evolution of human societies can 
be seen as analogous to biological 
evolution. However, human societies 
consist of rational individuals who 
influence social evolution and evolu -
tionary game theory assumes agents 
of limited rationality. This is the main 
problem with incorporating evolution -
ary game theory into a rational choice 
theory. Also, the traditional rational 
choice paradigm applies to individuals 
and evolutionary game theory studies 
populations. Nevertheless, rational -
ity is seen as utility maximisation and 
individuals can maximise their utility 
through interaction within a popula -
tion in the following ways: 1) learning 
through a trial and error process and 
imitating more successful strategies, 2) 
reflecting on the outcomes of different 
evolutionary processes and selecting 
the best based on rational calculations, and 3) selecting to participate in an 
evolutionary process should it seem 
to maximise their long-term utility. 
Therefore, it seems possible to use the 
evolutionary paradigm without abol -
ishing rationality. The rational animal 
is an individual and a member of a 
population at the same time. A realis -
tic account of human behaviour has to 
examine both a holistic and an indi -
vidualistic perspective to create a more 
powerful tool for analysing human 
behaviour. The rational choice para -
digm could be used in an evolutionary 
context to achieve this.
A rational individual is one who 
has a consistent order of preferences 
over a set of alternatives. In addition, 
the rational individual will always look 
to maximise her utility. “We do not 
know what [the rational man] wants...
but we know his indifference curves RatIonalIty  and evolutIon
By Vangelis Chiotis