Hume Studies
Volume 40, Number 2, 2014, pp. 205–226
Peter Millican, Department of Philosophy, Hertford College, University of Oxford, Catte 
Street, Oxford OX1 3BW, United Kingdom. Email: peter.millican@philosophy.ox.ac.uk.Skepticism about Garrett’s Hume : 
Faculties, Concepts, and Imposed 
Coherence
PETER MILLICAN
Hume , Don Garrett’s new book—long anticipated and well worth the wait—is a tour 
de force. Garrett’s impressive ability to weave a coherent philosophical account of 
Hume’s ideas, even when they seem most muddled or contradictory, is here fully 
displayed, linking together Hume’s thought as a whole and finding systematic 
themes within it whose potential richness has escaped other commentators. As a 
great admirer of Garrett’s work, from which I have learned so much over the years, 
I found it fascinating to see how his overall interpretation of Hume pulls together 
a variety of strands that are by now very familiar to me, but whose potential close 
interconnections I had not fully appreciated. Although the book aims to be “ac -
cessible to readers who have no specialized training in philosophy and little prior 
knowledge of Hume”—and mostly achieves this—it will undoubtedly prove to be, 
as Garrett hopes, “of substantial interest to historians of philosophy and to other 
philosophers grappling with questions like those that animated Hume” ( Hume , 
xix). Indeed I would judge it to be one of those relatively few secondary works that 
ought to be read by all serious scholars of Hume, given the sweep of its discussions 
and insights and the way in which it can help us understand familiar passages in 
new ways, not least by highlighting some of those general themes and connections 
that Garrett sees as unifying Hume’s philosophy. Even scholars who disagree with 
these unifying analyses will learn a great deal through critical engagement with 
Garrett’s thought-provoking and often ingenious arguments.Hume Studies206 Peter Millican
1. Teaching and Tone
Garrett’s book will also provide a valuable resource for teaching, providing cover -
age of all the main areas of Hume’s philosophy (including aesthetics, morals, and 
religion) and nicely framing the principal discussions between a first chapter that 
presents an excellent potted history of Hume’s life and works and an interesting 
final chapter that discusses Hume’s legacy. In the main body of the book, however, 
Garrett’s enthusiastic commitment to his distinctive and highly systematic under -
standing of Hume’s philosophy as a whole—which makes his work so interesting 
and challenging for other scholars—also brings some corresponding drawbacks for 
its use as a teaching resource. For in the process of presenting this vision, Garrett 
makes many general claims about Hume’s usage of terms and how his philosophy 
is to be understood, but most of these are not backed up in detail here, so they 
must be taken on trust. Garrett’s general avoidance of detailed scholarly debate is 
deliberate (see Hume , xx), and for many students this approach might indeed be 
very suitable, giving them one clear, overall picture of Hume’s thought, without 
having to worry too much about either scholarly disagreements or inconvenient 
exceptions, changes of mind, ambiguities, and apparent confusions in Hume’s own 
texts. But for those who need to get seriously engaged in the scholarly literature 
and grapple with interpretative debates, it is a shame to see so little distinction 
drawn between claims that are uncontroversial or very widely accepted and those 
that are Garrett’s own. He knows the texts very well and weaves a plausible narra -
tive, so most of his controversial claims are hard to assess in a brief discussion. But 
some prove to be straightforwardly false. For example, Garrett claims that “[Hume] 
employs the term ‘justified’ only for persons, never for beliefs, and he applies the 
term ‘just’ only to reasonings and the drawing of conclusions” ( Hume , 170). This 
claim—from which Garrett draws further interpretative conclusions—can easily 
be tested using electronic resources such as Hume Texts  at www.davidhume.org, 
where a search for “justified” pulls up eight paragraphs, of which the first, in Letter 
to a Gentleman , applies it to a proposition (31), the fourth to a “verdict” (“Standard 
of Taste,” 235), the fifth to an assertion (“Original Contract,” 471), the sixth to 
disputes (“Coalition of Parties,” 494), the seventh to actions (EPM 1.5; SBN 171),1 
and the eighth to a comparison (DNR 12.5).2 So Garrett’s claim is straightforwardly 
correct in only two of the eight cases. As for his claim about “just,” this occurs 
207 times, and again counterexamples can quickly be found. A different sort of 
case occurs when we are told that “Hume consistently followed his rule of never 
replying to attacks on his writings” ( Hume , 30), but the Letter from a Gentleman  
and some other letters—for example, to Hugh Blair in 1761 (Hume to Blair, 1761, 
in Letters 1:349–51), responding to Campbell’s Dissertation on Miracles —provide 
counterexamples to this claim.3Volume 40, Number 2, 2014207 Skepticism about Garrett’s Hume : Faculties, Concepts, and Imposed Coherence
Of course we all make mistakes, and my concern here is not with the presence 
of errors, which are inevitable, but rather with “the positive Air, which prevails in 
that Book” (Hume to John Stewart, February 1754, in Letters 1:187), and which risks 
misleading the reader about the level of interpretation that is going into Garrett’s 
assertions. I am not suggesting that Garrett himself is a dogmatist or aiming to sup -
press debate; indeed, he takes the trouble to conclude his chapters with very useful 
references to contrary interpretations, and his own view has clearly developed in 
various respects since his earlier book of 1997, as he acknowledges in respect of 
Hume’s argument concerning induction ( Hume , 210).4 The worry is rather that a 
book aimed at preparing students to engage in scholarly discussion needs to be 
particularly careful in distinguishing between agreed facts and original interpreta -
tive claims, since otherwise the students are likely to confuse these, which hampers 
their ability to assess—and contribute effectively to—the relevant debates. This 
concern is especially pertinent when the book is so interpretatively rich, aspiring 
to present a systematic Humean philosophy rather than a straightforward and 
relatively unadorned picture of Hume’s published views.
2. Boundaries, Abstraction, and Negation
Again I would like to emphasize that Garrett’s approach has virtues as well as 
dangers, and for a scholar it is fascinating to see how he weaves together Hume’s 
different discussions, apparently determined to paint a coherent picture of his 
philosophy. Regarding that philosophy, he writes, “I am firmly convinced of its 
overall consistency and coherence, and the organization of this book is intended 
to highlight those features” ( Hume , xxi). Fairly often this involves developing 
Hume’s positions, pointing out what view “he must” take, on pain of inconsistency 
or other error (for example, Hume , 57, 1 13, 148, 216, 305), and apparently with the 
implicit assumption that Hume could not be guilty of any such error. Sometimes 
these claims are convincing, but I would prefer to see more of that “doubt, and 
caution, and modesty, which, in all kinds of scrutiny and decision, ought for ever 
to accompany a just reasoner” (EHU 12.24; SBN 162).5 Otherwise the risk is that 
one loses track of the boundary between Hume’s view and the interpreter’s, and 
in some cases I fear that this may have happened in Garrett’s text.
Consider two examples from chapter 2, on “Perceptions and Their Principles.” 
The first of these concerns Hume’s theory of abstract ideas, which Garrett takes 
to inform a great deal of his philosophy. After outlining the theory, Garrett com -
ments, “If Hume’s theory of abstract ideas is to explain the full range of cases he 
intends it to cover, at least four fairly obvious elaborations must be made beyond 
those that he explicitly offers” ( Hume , 55). These are that an abstract idea of a 
relation  must involve a “revival set” of pairs (or multiples) rather than singletons, 
that there should be abstract ideas of individuals , and that judgments can involve Hume Studies208 Peter Millican
both an expanded  revival set (of things conceived but not necessarily believed) 
and an idealized  revival set ( Hume , 55–56). Moreover, in explicating T 1.1.7.14 (SBN 
23), Garrett goes on to argue that Humean abstract ideas must involve in addition 
what he calls a concept’s “ inferential role ” and “ conceptual role ” (Hume , 57), going 
well beyond anything implied by that passage.6 In this paragraph of Garrett’s, it 
is striking that we get references to nine sections of his own book against just the 
one to Hume’s own text, suggesting a focus on what Garrett thinks Hume ought  
to have said rather than what he did say: rational reconstruction rather than 
interpretation. Yet the reconstruction starts with the categorical statement that 
“[e]xplaining the full meaning of an abstract idea or concept therefore involves, 
in principle, several elements for Hume ” (Hume , 57, my emphasis). In the remain -
der of the book, Garrett applies his reconstructed theory of abstract ideas to the 
understanding of a wide range of Hume’s philosophy, including what he calls 
the “sense-based concepts,” which are expounded at length in chapter 4 (with 
the normative subset discussed further in chapter 5) and which provide perhaps 
the most distinctive central theme of his interpretation. Personally, I doubt that 
Hume’s theory of abstract ideas had so significant an influence, and I see little to 
suggest that Hume seriously engaged with the problems that Garrett identifies as 
requiring its further development, nor—if he did—that he saw how to deal with 
them. His theory may be referred to in half a dozen or so sections of the Treatise 
(“quite often,” according to Garrett, Hume , 37),7 but usually without any allu -
sion to the role of custom that distinguishes it from Berkeley’s theory; moreover, 
Hume’s only explicit mention of it after the Treatise  is in a first Enquiry  footnote, 
where he suggests that it might provide “the readiest solution” to the paradoxes 
of infinite divisibility (EHU 12.20n34; SBN 158n). Garrett’s attempts to develop 
a more powerful Humean theory are very interesting in themselves, and I would 
accept that if this theory can make good sense of texts that would otherwise be 
incoherent, then we should be prepared to consider it as suggestive of genuine 
tendencies in Hume’s own thought. Any such development, however, is bound 
to be highly controversial, so even in the best case it remains desirable to see clear 
boundaries drawn between the texts and their speculative interpretation.
A second example is provided by Garrett’s interpretation of Hume’s view of 
negation. We are told that “the simple absence of belief-constituting liveliness 
would not be denial, but rather mere absence of assent. . . . Accordingly, [Hume] is 
obliged to explain the mental denial of a proposition in terms of a positive belief 
in its contrary, and this in turn raises the question of how he understands contra -
riety” ( Hume , 75). Garrett then acknowledges the “initially puzzling” nature of 
Hume’s cursory comments on contrariety (at T 1.1.5.8; SBN 15) and goes on to say: 
“To understand this remark fully, we must distinguish between a conceptualized 
and a non-conceptualized way of representing the non-existence of something” 
(Hume , 75). The ensuing discussion—attempting to defend Hume by appeal to Volume 40, Number 2, 2014209 Skepticism about Garrett’s Hume : Faculties, Concepts, and Imposed Coherence
his theory of abstract ideas—is interesting and philosophically sophisticated, 
but notice how Garrett has moved from a claim about what Hume “is obliged” 
to think to the claim that this position is essential “to understand” what Hume 
actually wrote. It seems to me implausible that Hume had these sophisticated 
thoughts in mind. Rather, I believe that his treatment of contrariety—as his text 
suggests—is ill-considered and cursory, motivated mainly by the recognition that 
his artificial taxonomy of relations requires some notion of negation, but provid -
ing no satisfactory treatment of it. That taxonomy itself seems to be an attempt to 
shoehorn Locke’s theory of relations into a sevenfold structure, prompted by the 
seductive idea that the nature of the relations involved in a proposition can pro -
vide a reliable criterion of demonstrability (as applied at T 1.3.3.2 and 3.1.1.19 [SBN 
79, 463–64]). But sadly, the would-be criterion is nonsense, as Jonathan Bennett 
showed long ago ( Locke, Berkeley, Hume , 256), since (for example) it is entirely 
possible for demonstrable statements to involve relations from the supposedly 
“non-demonstrable” class.8 In the first Enquiry , there is no trace of this dubious 
theory of relations, and Hume’s sole criterion of demonstrability is based on his 
Conceivability Principle, which has no such evident weaknesses. Garrett, however, 
seeks to defend the original theory and builds on his elaborated interpretation 
of Humean abstract ideas to suggest a possible way in which “knowledge of such 
truths as {all dogs are mammals} could be accommodated within the constraints 
of the four knowledge-underwriting kinds of relations” ( Hume , 92–93). But there 
is no evidence in the text of the Treatise  that Hume has seriously thought through 
the application of his “knowledge-underwriting” theory of relations (let alone 
in combination with his theory of abstract ideas), and some evidence in the first 
Enquiry  that he had by then abandoned it. All this effort at subtle defense of the 
Treatise  theory, therefore, provides interesting philosophical discussion, but it 
does not thereby provide plausible interpretation. No doubt the book is richer for 
it, but I would have liked to see a clearer distinction maintained between Hume’s 
own views and Garrett’s speculative developments of them.
3. A Last-Minute Footnote and a Disputed Distinction
Garrett’s third chapter is devoted to “The mind and its faculties” and, like the 
second, aims to provide a general structured overview of central aspects of Hume’s 
philosophy prior to the more detailed discussion of specific topics in the later 
chapters. As Garrett explains in his preface, this arrangement has expository 
advantages over the “more obvious and common method of simply devoting suc -
cessive chapters to coverage of individual topics,” making it easier to understand 
the overall framework of Hume’s philosophy and to see its “coherence . . . and 
the consistency of his results” ( Hume , xxi). As might be expected, Garrett presents 
his overviews persuasively and elegantly. But an obvious risk of this overview  Hume Studies210 Peter Millican
approach—especially in the hands of an interpreter with Garrett’s commitments 
and sympathies—is that Hume’s philosophy will be presented as having greater 
consistency than it actually does, by downplaying changes in his views, ignoring 
controversies, or simply selective focus. For example, the first main section of this 
chapter is devoted to “Mind and Consciousness,” centered around Hume’s theory 
of personal identity and giving prominence to the implications of his Separabil -
ity Principle (as expounded earlier in chapter 2, Hume , 46–47). And although the 
doubts Hume expresses in the notorious 1740 Treatise  Appendix are mentioned 
at the end of this section, no hint is given that this aspect of Hume’s philosophy 
is particularly unclear in respect of his views subsequent to the Treatise . Personal 
identity does not feature in the first Enquiry , nor does the Separability Principle, 
which commits the Treatise  to such absurd and implausible results about the 
independence of perceptions.9 There is a serious risk here that views published 
in January 1739 and retracted in October 1740 are given greater prominence than 
those published—and repeatedly revised—from 1748 until Hume’s death in 1776, 
in works which Hume himself insisted should be taken as authoritative.
In the next section of chapter 3, Garrett turns his attention to “imagination 
and memory,” putting great emphasis on a distinction between what he calls 
“inclusive imagination ” and “ unreasoning imagination ” (terms he then continues 
to use in the remainder of the book) as expounded by Hume in the following 
famous footnote:
In general we may observe, that as our assent to all probable reasonings 
is founded on the vivacity of ideas, it resembles many of those whimsies 
and prejudices,10 which are rejected under the opprobrious character 
of being the offspring of the imagination. By this expression it appears 
that the word, imagination , is commonly us’d in two different senses; and 
tho’ nothing be more contrary to true philosophy, than this inaccuracy, 
yet in the following reasonings I have often been oblig’d to fall into it. 
When I oppose the imagination to the memory, I mean the faculty, by 
which we form our fainter ideas. When I oppose it to reason, I mean the 
same faculty, excluding only our demonstrative and probable reasonings. 
(T 1.3.9.19n22; SBN 1 17–18n)
What Garrett does not mention is that Hume inserted this “important footnote” 
(Hume , 87) at the very last minute, by means of a specially printed cancel  leaf that 
readers were asked to substitute physically into the already-printed volume. To 
enable this to be done, moreover, he had to craft it to fit into a very limited space, 
compress some of his existing text, and place the note at the end of the section 
rather than where it most naturally belongs.11 So Hume evidently considered the 
distinction drawn in the footnote to be important (as Garrett states) but was very Volume 40, Number 2, 2014211 Skepticism about Garrett’s Hume : Faculties, Concepts, and Imposed Coherence
restricted in what he could say. This might naturally lead us to expect it to be a 
distinction that Hume already  had firmly in mind as the Treatise  went to press, 
but which had not featured explicitly in the text of the Treatise  prior to the inser -
tion of the footnote. We might also expect that the footnote is unlikely, given the 
constraints of timing and space, to provide a comprehensive explanation of that 
distinction.
To put the footnote in philosophical context, it is important to bear in mind 
that for Hume, all thinking involves ideas of the imagination  as traditionally un -
derstood, since our ideas are all imagistic  (consisting of impression-copy content) 
rather than purely intellectual (see T 1.3.1.7; SBN 72).12 In this broad sense, there -
fore, the “imagination” can be conceived of as something like a virtual “canvas” 
on which those sensory (or reflective) images appear. (Of course the imagination 
incorporates ideas of other sensory modes beside vision, to which the analogy of 
a “canvas” is less appropriate.) But Hume also wants to use the word “imagina -
tion” in a narrower sense, distinguished  from “reason,” thus requiring a division 
amongst the principles that affect our ideas between those that count as “reason” 
and those that do not. The footnote suggests that the distinction is being drawn 
between “our demonstrative and probable reasonings” and everything else, thus 
supporting Garrett’s interpretation of Humean “reason” as a purely inferential 
faculty (88–89, 184). However, I do not believe that this can possibly be Hume’s 
view, for, most strikingly, it would immediately imply that intuitive  transitions be -
tween our ideas—what he refers to as intuitive “arguments” (T 1.3.14.35; SBN 172), 
“inference” (EHU 4.21; SBN 37), or “proof” (T 2.3.2.2; SBN 408; EHU 8.22n18; 
SBN 94n)—would have to be assigned to imagination in the narrower rather than 
the broader sense, thus falling outside the province of “reason.”
The most obvious objection to such a categorization lies in the fact that the 
vast majority of early-modern philosophers saw intuition as a function of reason, 
and I shall return to this shortly. But also, Hume’s own footnote text—despite 
the superficial impression to the contrary—strongly suggests that he must be of 
the same view. For the clear motivation behind his footnote is to distinguish the 
operations of “reason” from “those whimsies and prejudices which are rejected 
under the opprobrious character of being the offspring of the imagination,” and 
neither Hume nor philosophical common sense would ever suggest that intu -
ition—the supposedly rock-solid basis of demonstration—should be classed with 
the “whimsies and prejudices.”
These three points—the footnote’s last-minute haste, its brevity, and its appar -
ent motivation—already give good reason to suspect that it is strictly inaccurate in 
“excluding only our demonstrative and probable reasonings” from imagination in 
its narrower, “opprobrious” sense. But there is further strong evidence in the later 
text of the Treatise , which as mentioned above might reasonably be expected to 
show some recognition of this ambiguity in “the imagination,” given that Hume Hume Studies212 Peter Millican
judged it sufficiently important to require the trouble and expense of last-minute 
editing and page reprinting in section 1.3.9.
It was perhaps when writing about “unphilosophical probability” that Hume 
first recognized that he faces a challenge in distinguishing between “the judgment 
and imagination,” given that “[a]ccording to [Hume’s] system, all reasonings are 
nothing but the effects of custom; and custom has no influence, but by enliven -
ing the imagination” (T 1.3.13.1 1; SBN 149).13 In answer to this, he distinguishes 
between “general rules” that are “attributed to our judgment; as being more exten -
sive and constant,” and prejudices, which are “attributed . . . to the imagination; 
as being more capricious and uncertain.”14 Essentially the same challenge arises 
after his attack on “the antient philosophers” for being “guided by every trivial 
propensity of the imagination” (T 1.4.3.1 1; SBN 224), given that “the imagina -
tion, according to my own confession, [is] the ultimate judge of all systems of 
philosophy” (T 1.4.4.1; SBN 225). In response, Hume famously distinguishes “in 
the imagination betwixt the principles which are permanent, irresistible, and uni -
versal; such as the customary transition from causes to effects, and from effects to 
causes: And the principles, which are changeable, weak and irregular” (T 1.4.3.1 1; 
SBN 224). This is later echoed in the conclusion to Book 1, where he refers to “the 
understanding, that is, . . . the general and more establish’d properties of the 
imagination” (T 1.4.7.7; SBN 267), contrasting these with “trivial suggestions of 
the fancy” (T 1.4.7. 7; SBN 267). In all of these places, Hume is quite explicit that 
a distinction is being drawn between different principles that operate on (ideas 
in) the imagination and drawn not in terms of parts of the mind but rather on the 
basis of distinguishing between disciplined , rational  thought and unconstrained 
fantasy —that is, depending on whether or not the relevant principles are respect -
able and reliable .
The last-minute footnote begins in exactly the same spirit: “In general we may 
observe, that as our assent to all probable reasonings is founded on the vivacity 
of ideas, it resembles many of those whimsies and prejudices, which are rejected 
under the opprobrious character of being the offspring of the imagination. By 
this expression it appears that the word, imagination, is commonly us’d in two 
different senses” (T 1.3.9.19n22; SBN 1 17–18n). Garrett never notes this clear con -
nexion between the footnote and the later passages—indeed, as far as I can tell, he 
does not ever discuss those passages.15 This is particularly surprising in respect of 
the famous paragraph at T 1.4.4.1 (SBN 225–26), which is extremely prominent 
in Hume’s text and explicitly presents a distinction “in the imagination” which 
he states to be necessary “[i]n order to justify myself.” Given the importance that 
Garrett ascribes to the similar distinction in the T 1.3.9 (last-minute) footnote 
and his evident interest in Treatise  1.4.7 (discussed in his chapter 7), this is also 
unfortunate. Although I do not have space to debate the matter here, I believe it 
is the undermining of the T 1.4.4.1 distinction, spelled out in Hume’s “dangerous Volume 40, Number 2, 2014213 Skepticism about Garrett’s Hume : Faculties, Concepts, and Imposed Coherence
dilemma” at T 1.4.7.6–7 (SBN 267–68), that is mainly responsible for the skeptical 
despair he expresses in the conclusion of Book 1, and unlike Garrett, I take this 
undermining to be genuinely problematic for the philosophy of the Treatise  and a 
significant factor in Hume’s later expressed dissatisfaction with it. (See my “Chief 
Argument,” section 5.)16
To maintain his position regarding the interpretation of the last-minute 
footnote, Garrett must presumably claim that Hume had in mind two quite 
separate distinctions amongst the principles that operate on our ideas, drawn 
on apparently similar grounds and with considerable overlap, yet one of them is 
expressed in the final text of the Treatise  only within a hastily-composed footnote, 
and the two distinctions are never mentioned together. This seems so implausible 
that I consider it overwhelmingly likely that in the footnote Hume is alluding to 
the very same distinction that he will later be introducing in his main text, most 
explicitly at T 1.4.4.1 (SBN 225). But if this is correct, then the distinction can -
not fit Garrett’s interpretation, because it is based not on whether the relevant 
principles are specific to argument  or inference  but quite clearly on their solidity 
and respectability. The “general and more establish’d” side of the boundary will 
thus include the principles of demonstration  and induction  but also of intuition  
and presumably belief in body ,17 while the “trivial” side will include unreasoned 
associational fantasies, prejudicial inferences, and the irrational reasoning of the 
person “who is tormented he knows not why, with the apprehension of spectres 
in the dark” (T 1.4.4.1; SBN 225–26).18 It is readily understandable why Hume, 
thinking along these lines, would wish to categorize the latter as “imaginative” in 
a narrower sense than just in respect of their involving ideas  in the imagination. 
But it would be bizarre if—as Garrett seems to imply—he intended thus to class 
them together with the intuition of “relations of ideas.”
4. Reason, the Understanding, and Induction
Though we disagree on the interpretation of the distinction that Hume draws 
within the principles that operate on ideas in the imagination, Garrett and I both 
see this as hugely important in Hume’s philosophy. But whereas I would put more 
weight on it in respect of the philosophy of Treatise  Book 1 part 4 (where I believe 
it is most explicitly introduced and discussed), in Garrett’s book its greatest impact 
seems to be on the interpretation of part 3, and specifically, of Hume’s argument 
concerning induction. Garrett and I have been debating Hume’s treatment of 
induction for many years, and I have learned a great deal as a result, modifying 
my own position significantly in the process. In his chapter 6, many of his points 
seem to be pre-emptive moves against criticisms that I and others have made, but 
since at the end of that chapter he generously mentions the recent paper in which 
I have most fully urged these criticisms (“‘Scepticism’ about Induction”), I shall Hume Studies214 Peter Millican
leave the adjudication of most of this discussion as “an exercise for the reader” and 
continue to focus more specifically on his interpretation of the faculties.
In Cognition and Commitment , Garrett appealed to the precedent of Locke (and 
Locke only) when introducing his controversial claim that Humean “reason” is 
“simply the inferential or argumentative faculty of the mind” ( Hume , 85). This 
straightforward attribution to Locke is disputable,19 but we can put that aside for now. 
At the time, Garrett took Humean “understanding” to be broader than “reason,” 
and in subsequent discussion (starting with my “Hume on Reason,” 157–58n7), I 
argued against this on the basis of numerous passages in which Hume apparently 
equates “reason” with “the understanding.” Garrett—again generously—notes and 
now accepts this ( Hume , 89) but then gives a response that I find very surprising, 
claiming that Hume typically employs “the understanding” in a way that is also 
narrowly inferential, thus preserving the equivalence while hanging on to his inter -
pretation of “reason.”20 This is historically implausible. And it can also be opposed 
using an objection that Garrett himself has urged repeatedly in the past against 
those (including myself) who have postulated an ambiguity in Hume’s notion of 
reason, usually in connection with his argument concerning induction.21 To that 
claim of ambiguity, Garrett responded:
[N]owhere in the argument or elsewhere does Hume stipulate, or even 
imply, that he is employing a special or restricted sense of that term [viz. 
‘reason’]. By way of contrast, consider Hume’s procedure when he nar -
rows his sense of the term ‘probability’ at Treatise  I.iii.1 1. . . . Not only does 
he give explicit warning that he is doing so, he devotes an entire page to 
explaining and justifying his decision. . . . Presumably, . . . Hume has not 
explained his use of the term ‘reason’ up to this point . . . [because] he 
has been following the common Lockean usage of that term. ( Cognition 
and Commitment , 85)
Now, however, Garrett is himself postulating an unannounced ambiguity in 
Hume’s use of the phrase “the understanding,” contrary not only to Lockean usage 
(dating from 50 years before Hume) but also to the usage—so far as I can tell—of 
every other prominent philosopher of the intervening period.22 Garrett gives an 
interesting explanation of why Hume’s discoveries might push in this direction 
and be consistent with such a narrowing ( Hume , 89–90),23 but this fails to answer 
the objection and does nothing in itself to justify  the claim of narrowing. If the 
evidence of the T 1.3.9 footnote is as weak as I have argued above, and Garrett can -
not appeal to Lockean usage to support his position (since any Lockean support 
for his interpretation of reason is at the very least counterbalanced by comparable 
objections to his interpretation of the understanding), then little independent Volume 40, Number 2, 2014215 Skepticism about Garrett’s Hume : Faculties, Concepts, and Imposed Coherence
evidence remains for his key claim that the Humean faculty of reason is confined 
to demonstrative and probable reasoning (with intuition thus excluded).
The only other significant evidence that Garrett seems to offer is his reference 
to Hume’s tendency “to argue that various mental operations cannot be produced 
‘by reason’ solely on the grounds that they can be produced neither by demon -
strative reasoning, nor by probable reasoning” ( Hume , 92), and here he alludes to 
T 1.3.6.4, 2.3.3.2, and 3.1.1.18 (SBN 89, 413–14, 463). But this evidence is also quite 
weak. As I argue in “Sceptical Doubts” (128–30, 155–56) and “‘Scepticism’ about 
Induction,” (67–68), the argument in Treatise  1.3.6 is far more fully developed in 
the first Enquiry , where Hume takes the trouble to rule out both sensation and 
intuition as support for his Uniformity Principle before even considering demon -
strative and probable reasoning.24 Moreover the absence of these points from the 
much more cursory Treatise  discussion is easy to explain: Hume presumably just 
took it to be obvious (as have many of his commentators) that uniformity into the 
future cannot be justified either by appeal to current sensation or by intuition. A 
similar point can be made in respect of Treatise  2.3.3.2 (SBN 413–14), particularly 
given Hume’s gloss there of “demonstration” as “regard[ing] the abstract relations 
of ideas”—a gloss that would implicitly include intuition . Likewise, at Treatise  
3.1.1.18 (SBN 463), Hume’s contrast is drawn not between demonstration and 
probability but between “the comparing of ideas” and “the inferring of matter 
of fact”—again, the former would include intuition. Quite apart from this, it is 
clear from Hume’s writings that he almost universally thinks of intuition (which 
he rarely mentions explicitly) as paired with demonstration: the only significant 
case where he explicitly draws a significant contrast between them is at T 1.3.1.2 
(SBN 70) in connection with his theory of relations. This by itself makes it implau -
sible to suggest that he would assign them to different faculties. Moreover, in a 
well-known footnote, Hume explicitly rejects the “vulgar division of the acts of 
the understanding, into conception , judgment , and reasoning ” (T 1.3.7.5n20; SBN 
96–97n), which also counts strongly against the claim that he himself would place 
the last of these in a separate faculty from the others.25
Even if this were not enough, we find in the Treatise  and every one of the three 
“recast” volumes , explicit definitions of “reason” not in terms of inference  but rather 
“truth and falsehood”; moreover two of these occur precisely in the sections to 
which Garrett appeals in the final evidence that we have just considered. Thus, 
Hume calls reason the faculty “which judges of truth and falshood” (T 2.3.3.8; 
SBN 417), words echoed in the Dissertation on the Passions  where he says “reason, 
in a strict sense, as meaning the judgment of truth and falsehood” (DP 5.1).26 At 
T 3.1.1.9 (SBN 458), Hume states that “[r]eason is the discovery of truth or fals -
hood”; in the original edition of the first Enquiry  this becomes “[t]hat faculty, 
by which we discern Truth and Falshood” (EHU 1.1, original footnote); and in 
the second Enquiry  we read that “reason . . . conveys the knowledge of truth and Hume Studies216 Peter Millican
falsehood” (EPM App. 1.21; SBN 294). As I have argued elsewhere, this usage is 
absolutely in line with that of most of Hume’s contemporaries, giving further 
strength to the claim that Humean “reason” is standardly the faculty of cognition  
rather than merely of inference .27 There is much more that could be said here, since 
I also believe that it is very hard to make sense of Hume’s arguments—notably 
concerning induction—in Garrett’s terms, and this would furnish yet more pres -
sure against his interpretation of the Humean faculties. But since, as I say, these 
matters have been discussed extensively elsewhere and space here is limited, I 
shall now leave them aside.
5. Sense-Based Concepts and Morality
One of the most distinctive aspects of Garrett’s interpretation—developed espe -
cially in his fourth and fifth chapters—is his extension of the parallel between 
causation and morality as a model for a notion of “sense-based” concepts, which, 
he claims, informs Hume’s philosophy as a whole, contributing significantly to 
its “originality, coherence, and power” ( Hume , 5). Such sense-based concepts 
include not only causation , virtue , and vice but also color, beauty , deformity , and 
probability . All of these, Garrett thinks (following on from his illuminating dis -
cussions of causation and virtue in earlier works), are susceptible of paired—but 
equivalent—definitions in a similar style, one “productive” (in terms of producing 
an appropriate impression) and one “responsive” (in terms of the relevant objec -
tive conditions). In consequence of this, these concepts are also “susceptible in 
principle to a systematic ambiguity” and a related “particular kind of disagreement 
in application that results from their essential relation to a standard of judgment” 
(Hume , 125–26). Two other features they share are “a particular kind of simplic -
ity” ( Hume , 123) and “a certain general resistance to global error ” (Hume , 127). This 
is fascinating stuff, but there is a great deal of interpretation going on here, with 
few instances of texts that directly confirm Hume’s endorsement of these claims 
over the entire range—for example, paired definitions are to be found only in the 
cases of causation (or causal necessity) and virtue (or personal merit),28 and Hume 
never refers to any “sense” of causation or of probability. Comprehensive critical 
appraisal would be a major task, so I shall here make do with some brief observa -
tions suggesting that Garrett’s highly systematic picture of Hume’s philosophy 
faces problems even in the central case of our moral concepts.
Garrett apparently takes inspiration from Kemp Smith’s suggestion that the 
guiding principle of Hume’s system is an extension to the theoretical realm of the 
moral sentimentalism that he learned from Francis Hutcheson, with aesthetic and 
moral judgements becoming the model for “sense-based” concepts as a whole 
(Hume , 19, 1 15). All this is interesting, and the parallels often illuminating, but 
one might find the extent of Garrett’s emphasis rather misleading given that Volume 40, Number 2, 2014217 Skepticism about Garrett’s Hume : Faculties, Concepts, and Imposed Coherence
Hume refers to a “moral sense” only twice in his philosophical writings, once in 
the heading of Treatise  3.1.2, “Moral distinctions deriv’d from a moral sense,” and 
once when referring back to it: “Were nothing esteem’d virtue but what were ben -
eficial to society, I am persuaded, that the foregoing explication of the moral sense 
ought still to be receiv’d, and that upon sufficient evidence.” (T 3.3.1.25; SBN 588).
Moreover, given Hume’s desire to recommend his work to Hutcheson (a factor 
particularly evident in the re-written Treatise  3.3.6, which Hume edited specially 
for that purpose,29 I suspect that he is here somewhat misdescribing the tendency 
of his theory. Admittedly, he refers rather more to a “sense of morals,” “sense of 
virtue,” and “sense of justice,”30 but these are mostly generic references to moral 
judgment —just as when Hume repeatedly refers to a “sense of interest” without (I 
take it) any suggestion that assessing our own interest requires some distinctive 
sense . (See T 3.2.2.10, 3.2.2.22, 3.2.5.1 1, 3.2.9.4; SBN 490, 498, 522, 553.) Such ref -
erences therefore do little to justify the idea of morality as involving some special 
sense  of the kind that Hutcheson hypothesized.
Perhaps the passages in the Treatise that come nearer than any others are these:
To have the sense of virtue, is nothing but to feel a satisfaction of a 
particular kind from the contemplation of a character. The very feeling  
constitutes our praise or admiration. . . . We do not infer a character to 
be virtuous, because it pleases: But in feeling that it pleases after such 
a particular manner, we in effect feel that it is virtuous. The case is the 
same as in our judgments concerning all kinds of beauty, and tastes, and 
sensations. Our approbation is imply’d in the immediate pleasure they 
convey to us. (T 3.1.2.3; SBN 471)
[W]e may farther confirm the foregoing proposition, that those impressions, 
which give rise to this sense of justice, are not natural to the mind of man, but 
arise from artifice and human conventions . (T 3.2.2.21; SBN 496)
The nearest in the second Enquiry  are where Hume describes the “controversy 
. . . concerning the general foundation of morals; whether they be derived 
from reason, or from sentiment; whether we attain the knowledge of them by a 
chain of argument and induction, or by an immediate feeling and finer internal 
sense” (EPM 1.3; SBN 170) and goes on to anticipate his conclusion that “[t]he 
final sentence . . . which pronounces characters and actions amiable or odious, 
praise-worthy or blameable . . . depends on some internal sense or feeling” (EPM 
1.9; SBN 172–73). In the first appendix, when he turns to consider these issues in 
detail, Hume does not describe his theory as involving a sense  at all, and indeed 
at EPM App 1.6 (SBN 287–88), he seems to be treating a sentiment  as contrasting Hume Studies218 Peter Millican
with a cognitive account in terms of a “sense or faculty.” Overall, the terms moral 
sentiment  and taste seem more faithful to his view than talking of a moral sense .
Certainly Hume is a sentimentalist , who sees our sentiments or feelings as 
playing a crucial role in moral thinking and judgment. If this is what Garrett 
means in calling him a “moral sense theorist,” it is perhaps unexceptionable. But 
if the term is intended to ally him with predecessors such as Hutcheson, then that 
would be at least to some extent misleading. For Hutcheson, “the Understanding , 
or Reason , . . . [is] attended with an higher sort of Sensations” which “represent” 
some things “as Good” and others “as Evil” ( Essay , 32n). So these Hutchesonian 
senses report to reason or the understanding—which he at any rate considers 
to be the faculty that judges truth and falsehood—quite distinct from the will 
which encompasses “the calm desire  of good, and aversion to evil” ( Essay , 31).31 
This seems a long way from Hume’s famous arguments of T 3.1.1, which argue 
that morality cannot be derived from reason on the ground that reason “is the 
discovery of truth or falshood”32 Further discussion of this, however, would bring 
us back to the debate on Hume’s notion of reason, which would presumably need 
to be settled first.
So I shall end this section by briefly linking the discussion of Hume’s moral 
theory and its supposed “sense-based” character with my earlier comments about 
the (arguably excessive) coherence—both between topics and over time—that 
Garrett finds in Hume’s philosophy. In the Treatise , good and evil are repeat -
edly identified with pleasure and pain (T 2.1.1.4, 2.3.1.1, 2.3.9.1, 2.3.9.8, 3.1.2.4; 
SBN 276, 399, 438, 439, 471–72), and Hume’s predominant theory of motivation 
is in terms of the personal pursuit of pleasure and avoidance of pain (T 2.3.3.3; 
SBN 414).33 He also identifies “the distinguishing impressions, by which moral 
good or evil is known” as particular pleasures and pains (T 3.1.2.3, 3.1.2.6; SBN 
471, 473), and thus gets close to something like a sense-based theory, because “as 
. . . pleasure or pain cannot be unknown to the person who feels it, it follows, 
that there is just so much vice or virtue in any character, as every one places in 
it, and that ’tis impossible in this particular we can ever be mistaken” (T 3.2.8.8; 
SBN 547; see also T 2.1.7.4–5; SBN 295–96). So morality is indeed felt rather than 
“judged of” (T 3.1.2.1; SBN 470) and has that “resistance to global error” ( Hume , 
127) which Garrett takes to be characteristic of sense-based concepts in general. 
However, the passage just quoted from T 3.2.8.8 (SBN 547) seems to be Garrett’s 
only relatively clear textual Humean authority for ascribing such error-resistance 
to what he identifies as Hume’s “sense-based concepts,” in which case the change 
in Hume’s view that I shall now describe seems potentially of wider significance 
for his interpretation.
By the time Hume comes to write the second Enquiry , his view of moral ap -
praisal has developed, and his presentation of it perhaps even more so.34 He no 
longer argues that morality is “more properly felt than judg’d of” and emphasizes Volume 40, Number 2, 2014219 Skepticism about Garrett’s Hume : Faculties, Concepts, and Imposed Coherence
instead the joint role of reason and sentiment, with sentiment declaring “the final 
sentence” (EPM 1.9; SBN 172) in favor of virtue, while reason does the bulk of the 
work, identifying the practical tendencies of characters to foster usefulness or agree -
ableness to oneself or others. Thus, prior to making a moral judgment, “it is often 
necessary, we find, that much reasoning should precede, that nice distinctions be 
made, just conclusions drawn, distant comparisons formed, complicated relations 
examined, and general facts fixed and ascertained” (EPM 1.9; SBN 173).35 Since 
usefulness  is such a key part of morality, “it is evident, that reason  must enter for a 
considerable share in all decisions of this kind; since nothing but that faculty can 
instruct us in the tendency of qualities and actions, and point out their beneficial 
consequences to society and to their possessor”(EPM App 1.2; SBN 285). Reason 
thus does most of the heavy lifting, after which the sentiment of humanity —“a 
feeling for the happiness of mankind, and a resentment of their misery”—delivers 
the moral verdict “in favour of those [tendencies], which are useful and beneficial” 
(EPM App 1.3; SBN 286).36 In the second Enquiry , Hume could no longer say “that 
there is just so much vice or virtue in any character, as every one places in it, and 
that ’tis impossible in this particular we can ever be mistaken” (T 3.2.8.8; SBN 547); 
indeed, his stinging attack on the “monkish virtues” highlights how mistaken 
people can be (EPM 9.3; SBN 270). Garrett must look elsewhere, therefore, for 
strong and enduring textual evidence to support his claim of “resistance to global 
error” in Humean “sense-based” concepts.
6. Religion
Following his introductory chapter and the four that develop the general framework 
of his interpretation with “implications . . . across multiple areas of philosophy,” 
Garrett devotes four chapters to narrower topics, with chapter 6 on “Induction and 
Causation,” chapter 7 on “Skepticism and Probability,” chapter 8 on “Morality and 
Virtue,” and chapter 9 on “Religion and God.” Having said something above on all 
of these except the last, I shall conclude with a brief review of Garrett’s treatment 
of Hume on religion. The chapter provides very useful summary and discussion 
of Hume’s treatments of religious belief, the Design Argument, the “argument a 
priori ” (from Dialogues  9), the problem of evil, “true religion,” miracles, and the 
relation between religion and morality.
Hume’s writings on religion are commonly taken to be insincere in various 
ways, but Garrett prefers to interpret them without resort to irony or theological 
lying. He nevertheless finds sufficient nuance and qualification in Hume’s (and 
Philo’s) relatively positive statements to indicate a coherent view of religion that 
can properly be described as “infidel” (a term which Garrett prefers to “atheist” 
Hume , 312–13). Considerations of space no doubt required some selectivity (so, 
for example, the topics of immortality and a “future state”—though mentioned Hume Studies220 Peter Millican
at Hume , 22, 27–28, and 284—are not discussed here), but overall the chapter pro -
vides a reliable, efficient, and well-balanced discussion of most of the main themes 
of Hume’s treatment of religion. This will be especially valuable for teachers and 
students, given how few books on Hume provide anything similar.
My own biggest debate with chapter 9 would concern Hume’s argument on 
miracles, which Garrett interprets as requiring a sharp distinction between “proofs” 
(definitive of laws of nature  and hence of miracles ) and “probabilities” ( Hume , 
304, 306). By contrast, I see the argument as arising from general probabilistic 
considerations, with “proofs” as just an extreme case (thus avoiding the potential 
criticism that treating them quite differently will simply beg the question against 
miracles). Garrett generously references my interpretation ( Hume , 313–14), com -
menting—correctly—that it “cannot fully vindicate or sustain Hume’s argument” 
(Hume , 306), while acknowledging that his own interpretation raises its own 
philosophical questions ( Hume , 305–306). The texts give no clear verdict, and there 
is plenty of scope for interesting discussion, which I look forward to pursuing on 
a later occasion. As so often, Garrett’s interpretation—though of course disput -
able—combines deep philosophical understanding and ingenuity, sensitivity to 
the text, and overall plausibility. And in this very rich book there are many other 
examples of such cases, with great potential to add to the interest of future Hume 
scholarship. Garrett’s Hume  is a fine contribution to that scholarship, and it will 
no doubt continue to provoke both objections and approval—often from the very 
same sources—for a long time to come!
NOTES
1 References to the second Enquiry  are to Hume, An Enquiry concerning the Principles of 
Morals , ed. Beauchamp, cited in the text as “EPM” followed by section and paragraph 
numbers, and to Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles 
of Morals , ed. Selby-Bigge and Nidditch, cited in the text as “SBN” followed by page 
number.
2 Hume’s Dialogues concerning Natural Religion are cited in the text as “DNR” followed 
by part and paragraph numbers.
3 As these examples suggest, the word “never” in the secondary literature (much like 
the word “surely” in student essays) very often signposts a point worthy of critical 
scrutiny.
4 An instance analogous to the “justified” example above is Garrett’s statement in 
Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy  that “Hume does not use ‘evidence’ as 
a term of epistemic evaluation at all. On the contrary, he consistently uses it to mean 
‘evidentness’” ( Cognition and Commitment , 228). Now he has changed his mind, pre -
senting this as an example of a word which is systematically ambiguous ( Hume , 141), Volume 40, Number 2, 2014221 Skepticism about Garrett’s Hume : Faculties, Concepts, and Imposed Coherence
and citing EHU 10.4 (SBN 1 10) as an example on the other side (a section to which I 
had referred in contesting the original claim when discussing that book in “Reason 
and Induction,” 159).
5 References to the first Enquiry  are to Hume, Enquiry concerning Human Understanding , 
ed. Beauchamp, hereafter cited in the text as “EHU” followed by section and paragraph, 
and to Enquiries Concerning Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles of Morals , 
ed. Selby-Bigge and Nidditch, cited in the text as “SBN” followed by page number.
6 References to the Treatise are to Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature , ed. Norton and 
Norton, hereafter cited in the text as “T” followed by Book, part, section, and paragraph 
number, and to Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature , ed. Selby-Bigge, rev. by Nidditch, 
cited in the text as “SBN” followed by the page number.
7 Abstract or general ideas are mentioned or alluded to at T 1.1.7, 1.2.3.56, 1.2.4.12, 
1.3.14.13, 1.4.3.10, 2.3.6.2, and T App. 2; SBN 1725, 345, 43, 1612, 224, 4245, 623, but 
few of these passages give any hint of the detail of Hume’s own theory, so it is unclear 
how often he has it specifically in mind. Treatise 1.3.6.15 and 2.3.1.16; (SBN 93, 405) can 
also be construed as alluding to the theory (as Garrett has pointed out to me), though 
Hume’s talk of objects which have been found constantly conjoined does not by itself 
indicate that he is referring to a revival set of pairs of instances (let alone, in the case 
of the idea of causation itself at Treatise  2.3.1.16, a revival set of revival sets of pairs).
8 Hume’s shoehorning involves an argument that all of the relations that Locke clas -
sified as “natural” (T 1.1.4.3; SBN 1 1–12) and “instituted” (T 1.1.4.5; SBN 12) fall under 
the category of causation. But there are plenty of propositions involving these relations 
that are intuitively or demonstratively certain, for example, “every grandmother is a 
mother.”
9 When discussing the argument concerning induction in section 4 of the Enquiry , 
Garrett claims to identify “a tacit employment of the Separability Principle” ( Hume , 176). 
But this is unconvincing and question-begging: the text makes perfect sense without 
any such dependence. In my “Context, Aims, and Structure,” I briefly explain how the 
Separability Principle is intimately connected to several of the distinctive theses that 
are absent from the first Enquiry (50–51n37).
10 Garrett’s text omits this comma, and replaces Hume’s “vivacity” with “liveliness.”
1 1 It seems to me extremely likely that Hume appreciated the need for this new note 
on re-reading the end of paragraph T 1.3.9.4: “All this, and every thing else, which I 
believe, are nothing but ideas; tho’ by their force and settled order, arising from custom 
and the relation of cause and effect, they distinguish themselves from the other ideas, 
which are merely the offspring of the imagination” (SBN 108). This raises exactly the 
issue addressed in the footnote and is the only other place in any of Hume’s publications 
that mentions “the offspring of the imagination.” If the footnote was not prompted 
by this paragraph, then the coincidence of phraseology and appropriateness would be 
very surprising.
12 Hume contrasts ideas of the imagination with ideas of memory , but his theory seems 
to be that when we call on our memory in thought, new ideas in the imagination are 
copied from those of memory (T 1.3.9.7; SBN 1 10), so it is usually more appropriate to 
refer to impressions  of the memory, as he frequently does (T 1.3.4.1, 1.3.4.3, 1.3.6.3–7, Hume Studies222 Peter Millican
1.3.9.3, 1.3.9.7, 1.3.10.9, 1.4.1.9, 1.4.2.42–43, 2.3.1.17; SBN 82, 84, 88–89, 108, 1 10, 123, 
184, 209, 406). Garrett explains imagination and memory as two faculties for “having 
ideas” ( Hume , 87) and does not mention this aspect of Hume’s discussion, though I 
expect he would agree that Hume views all of our thinking  as taking place using ideas 
in the (inclusive) imagination rather than memory.
13 Hume refers frequently to “the judgment” in the course of his psychological dis -
cussions at T 1.3.9–13, but never again in Book 1. What he says at T 1.3.13.1 1 (SBN 149) 
matches closely with what he will later say about “the understanding,” and the pas -
sage at T 3.3.4.13 (SBN 613) displays clear alternation between “the judgment” and 
“the understanding,” suggesting an equivalence. Also relevant here is the footnote 
at T 1.3.7.5n20 (SBN 96–97n), which rejects the standard “division of the acts of the 
understanding, into conception , judgment  and reasoning .”
14 Hume goes on to make reference to “the more general and authentic operations 
of the understanding,” and “the most establish’d principles of reasoning” (T 1.3.13.12; 
SBN 150), but the extent of these descriptions is not exactly clear.
15 Unfortunately, the book does not contain an index of references to passages in 
Hume’s works, and its index did not help me here (for example, no entries for “modern 
philosophy,” “permanent,” “general,” “irregular,” or “trivial”), so I cannot be com -
pletely certain of this.
16 Garrett sees a resolution to these skeptical concerns at T 1.4.7.1 1 (SBN 270) in what 
he calls Hume’s “Title Principle” ( Hume , 228–36), but I find this very unconvincing. 
Superstitious reasoning is frequently “lively, and mixes itself with some propensity,” but 
Hume would not wish to endorse it, so the canvassed principle gives no solid criterion 
for discrimination. Nor do I see any evidence in the structure of the Treatise  text (nor 
indeed in any other primary text) that it has anything like the prominence in Hume’s 
thought that Garrett ascribes to it.
17 Although Hume states that the belief in body is based on “trivial qualities of the 
fancy” (T 1.4.2.56; SBN 217), he seems to consider the belief itself permanent, irresist -
ible, and universal, with the possible temporary exception of those who are intensely 
contemplating skeptical arguments (for example, T 1.4.2.1, 1.4.2.56–57; SBN 187, 217–18; 
EHU 12.7; SBN 151).
18 Hume says here that such a tormented individual “may, perhaps, be said to reason, 
and to reason naturally too,” expressing some hesitation that can be explained both 
on Garrett’s view and my own (according to which Humean “reason” standardly refers 
to the general faculty of cognition ). But Hume goes on to insist that even if this does 
count as reasoning, its pathological nature leaves it on the “changeable, weak, and 
irregular” side of his distinction—thus confirming that it is respectability rather than 
ratiocination which is the crucial criterion.
19 See my “Sceptical Doubts,” section 2 for discussion of these matters. Locke’s own 
usage of “reason” is more variable than Garrett seems to suggest, and indeed his chapter 
“Of Reason” begins with the observation that “ The Word Reason  in the English  Language 
has different significations ” (Essay , 4.17.1).
20 There is a tension here with a response that Garrett made to an earlier criticism 
when I pointed out that Hume’s argument as presented in the Enquiry  explicitly rules Volume 40, Number 2, 2014223 Skepticism about Garrett’s Hume : Faculties, Concepts, and Imposed Coherence
out intuition  as well as demonstration and probable reasoning as a basis for the Unifor -
mity Principle (Millican, “Hume on Reason,” 151–52). Garrett’s reply acknowledges but 
deflects the point, stating that “[a]t the same time that Hume expands his argument 
in the Enquiry , . . . he also expands the famous conclusion to rule out any ‘reasoning or 
process of the understanding ,’ thereby eliminating such non-inferential processes of the 
understanding as intuition or the perception of a probable connection between even 
a single ‘proof’ and a conclusion” ( Cognition and Commitment , 184).
21 Like many others, I once considered an ambiguity in Humean “reason” to be 
mandated by the interpretation of Hume’s argument concerning induction. Pressure 
from Garrett, based partly on the objection discussed here, was a significant factor in 
my relinquishing such a claim of ambiguity, and in my “‘Scepticism’ about Induction,” 
I abandon it completely (see particularly 82–83).
22 For extensive discussion of the usage of Hume’s contemporaries, see my “‘Scep -
ticism’ about Induction,” 79–81 and accompanying footnotes. For discussion of 
contemporary usage of terms such as “reasoning,” “proof,” and “argument”—notably 
as revealed by Johnson’s dictionary of 1756 and confirmed by Hume’s own usage—see 
“‘Scepticism’ about Induction,” 75.
23 Likewise, I sought to justify my own claim against Garrett that Humean “reason” 
required reinterpretation in the wake of his famous argument (“Reason and Induction,” 
145–47), but now find this ultimately unconvincing.
24 This form of argument suggests that Hume sees sensation as a possible foundation 
for judgment by reason but does not imply that sensation is strictly a part of reason, 
only that—in Hutcheson’s term—it “reports to” reason.
25 Garrett mentions this footnote in a different connection, arguing that within it 
Hume’s “use of ‘the understanding’ .  . . is clearly meant to be that of scholastic philoso -
phers, rather than Hume himself” ( Hume , 91). This is very debatable, partly because 
Hume’s contemporaries also commonly advocated the “vulgar division” he criticizes 
and Thomas Reid much later still described it as “of a very general reception” ( Intellectual 
Powers , 67–68; see Millican, “‘Scepticism’ about Induction,” 81), and partly because 
Hume himself, later in the same footnote, refers to “[w]hat we may in general affirm 
concerning these three acts of the understanding,” writing clearly in propria persona  
(T 1.3.7.5n20; SBN 96–97n).
26 References to Hume’s Dissertation on the Passions  are cited in the text as “DP” fol -
lowed by section and paragraph number.
27 Again, for discussion of and quotations from Hume’s contemporaries, see my 
“‘Scepticism’ about Induction,” 79–81 and accompanying footnotes. In Reason , Induc -
tion and Causation in Hume’s Philosophy , Garrett appeals to James Beattie’s usage to 
support his claims (7), but for reasons I explain in “‘Scepticism’ about Induction,” such 
an appeal cannot be given much weight and would anyway support at most Garrett’s 
claim with regard to “reason” and count equally against his claim with regard to “the 
understanding” (80 and 80n92).
28 Moreover the latter case is clear only in the second Enquiry . Garrett states that 
“[i]n both the Treatise  and the second Enquiry  . . . [Hume] does offer both productive 
and responsive definitions of ‘virtue’ or . . . ‘personal merit’” ( Hume , 125), but the Hume Studies224 Peter Millican
quotations that follow are only from the Enquiry , and there is no textual reference to 
the Treatise . I presume that he is alluding to T 3.3.1.30 (SBN 591), though Hume here 
makes no mention of definition  and, read straightforwardly, seems to be summarizing 
a hypothesis about what causes  “that particular feeling or sentiment, on which moral 
distinctions depend.”
29 This should be borne in mind when assessing Garrett’s appeals to the text of Treatise  
3.3.6—the final section of the Treatise— to support his somewhat pro-Hutchesonian 
interpretation, for example, Hume  166–67 and 281.
30 Reference to a “sense of morals” occurs in the Treatise  at T 3.1.1.10, 3.2.1.18, and 
3.3.6.3; SBN 458, 483, 619 (twice in the last of these—within the final section of the 
Treatise  which was specially rewritten and sent to Hutcheson); “sense of virtue” at 
T 2.1.12.5, 3.1.2.3, 3.1.2.9, 3.2.1.19, 3.2.2.20, 3.2.2.25, and (again) 3.3.6.3 (SBN 326, 
471, 475, 484, 496, 500, and 619); “sense of justice” at T 3.2.1.17, 3.2.2.20, and 3.2.2.21 
(SBN 483, 496, 496). None of these phrases occurs at all in the second Enquiry .
31 For more on the interpretation of Hutcheson and further references, including 
to his Synopsis of Metaphysics  which contains his most detailed faculty taxonomy, 
see my “‘Scepticism’ about Induction,” section 3.2. One cannot help wondering 
whether Hutcheson’s enthusiasm for placing the moral sense as reporting to the under -
standing—expressed in multiple works published or edited in 1742—might have had 
something to do with his perusal of an infidel manuscript (that is, Treatise  Book 3) in 
1740 and then wishing to distance himself from it.
32 Hume himself seems to have misinterpreted Hutcheson when he wrote the sub -
sequently deleted footnote at EHU 1.4 crediting Hutcheson with the discovery that 
“[m]oral Perceptions, therefore, ought not to be clas’d with the Operations of the 
Understanding, but with the Tastes or Sentiments.” The footnote is present only in 
the 1748 and 1750 editions and may be found in Beauchamp’s critical edition or in the 
textual variants section of my own edition (“Textual Variants,” 177–78).
33 This is, therefore, fundamentally a form of egoistic hedonism, although Hume 
tempers it with an emphasis on the mechanism of sympathy  which leads us to give 
weight to other people’s pleasures and pains (albeit only  by making them our own— so 
the motivation is still at least quasi-egoistic). Hume recognizes that this is not the 
whole story when he observes the benevolence  we feel towards those we love (and anger 
towards those we hate), though I take it to be significant that when he does so, it is with 
a deep expression of disappointment at the consequent loss of theoretical simplicity 
from his system (T 2.2.6.2; SBN 366–67). This recognition is echoed later, for example, 
at T 2.3.3.9 and 2.3.9.8 (SBN 417–18, 439).
34 This also parallels a very strong move away from egoism, conspicuously signalled 
at the beginning of section 2 of the second Enquiry  with an attack on the selfish 
theory (later moved into Appendix 2, “Of Self-Love”). This seems to be unmentioned 
in Garrett’s book, as indeed is the entire issue of egoism, though in Hume’s time, this 
was a key issue of moral debate.
35 This greater emphasis on calculation strengthens the analogy with causal judge -
ments (for example, using Hume’s “Rules by which to judge of causes and effects”), 
but at the same time makes the overall theory less plausibly describable as involving a 
sense  of morality or causation.Volume 40, Number 2, 2014225 Skepticism about Garrett’s Hume : Faculties, Concepts, and Imposed Coherence
36 Note here that humanity— a direct concern for mankind—is not the same as sympa -
thy in the primary Treatise  sense, which is a mechanism that generates personal pleasure 
or pain from the pleasure or pain of others. Having rejected his previous tendency 
towards egoism, Hume no longer believes that we typically care about others only by 
making their feelings our own.
WORKS CITED
Bennett, Jonathan. Locke, Berkeley, Hume: Central Themes . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1971.
Blackburn, Simon. How to Read Hume . London: Granta, 2008.
Craig, Edward. The Mind of God and the Works of Man . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1987.
davidhume.org . Hume Texts . http:// www.davidhume.org . Accessed 1st April 2015.
Garrett, Don. Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy . New York: Oxford Uni -
versity Press, 1987.
Garrett, Don. Hume . Abington, England and New York: Routledge, 2015.
Garrett, Don. “Ideas, Reason, and Skepticism: Replies to My Critics,” Hume Studies  24 
(1998): 171–94.
Garrett, Don, and Peter Millican. Reason, Induction and Causation in Hume’s Philoso -
phy, IASH Occasional Paper 19. Edinburgh: Institute for Advanced Studies in the 
Humanities, 201 1.
Hume, David. Dialogues concerning Natural Religion . Edited by Norman Kemp Smith. 
Edinburgh: Nelson, 1947.
Hume, David. A Dissertation on the Passions and The Natural History of Religion: A Critical 
Edition . Edited by Tom L. Beauchamp. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2007.
Hume, David. Enquiries Concerning the Human Understanding and Concerning the Principles 
of Morals . Edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge, revised by P. H. Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1975.
Hume, David. An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding: A Critical Edition . Edited by 
Tom L. Beauchamp. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2001.
Hume, David. An Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals: A Critical Edition . Edited by 
Tom L. Beauchamp. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1998.
Hume, David. Letter from a Gentleman to his Friend in Edinburgh . In A Treatise of Human 
Nature: A Critical Edition , vol. 1. Edited by David F. Norton and Mary J. Norton, 
419–31. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2007.
Hume, David. Letters of David Hume.  Edited by J. Y. T. Greig, vol. 1. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1932.
Hume, David. “Of the Coalition of Parties,” in Essays: Moral, Political and Literary , revised 
edition. Edited by Eugene F. Miller, 493–501. Indianapolis: Liberty Classics , 1987.
Hume, David. “Of the Original Contract” in Essays: Moral, Political and Literary , revised 
edition. Edited by Eugene F. Miller, 465–488. Indianapolis: Liberty Classics , 1987.
Hume, David. “Of the Standard of Taste,” in Essays: Moral, Political and Literary , revised 
edition. Edited by Eugene F. Miller, 226–49. Indianapolis: Liberty Classics , 1987.Hume Studies226 Peter Millican
Hume, David. A Treatise of Human Nature: A Critical Edition , vol. 1. Edited by David F. 
Norton and Mary J. Norton. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2007.
Hume, David. A Treatise of Human Nature . Edited by L. A. Selby-Bigge, revised by P. H. 
Nidditch. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1978.
Hutcheson, Francis. An Essay on the Nature and Conduct of the Passions and Affections, 
with Illustrations on the Moral Sense . Edited by Aaron Garrett. Indianapolis: Liberty 
Fund, 2002.
Hutcheson, Francis. Synopsis of Metaphysics  in Logic, Metaphysics, and the Natural Socia -
bility of Mankind . Edited by James Moore and Michael Silverthorne, translated by 
Michael Silverthorne, 57–187. Indianapolis: Liberty Fund, 2006.
Kemp Smith, Norman. The Philosophy of David Hume . London: Macmillan, 1941.
Locke, John. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding . Edited by P. H. Nidditch. Ox -
ford: Clarendon Press, 1975.
Millican, Peter. “The Context, Aims, and Structure of Hume’s First Enquiry. ” In Reading 
Hume on Human Understanding , edited by Peter Millican, 27–65. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 2002.
Millican, Peter. “Hume on Reason and Induction: Epistemology or Cognitive Science?” 
Hume Studies  24 (1998): 141–60.
Millican, Peter. “Hume’s Chief Argument.” In The Oxford Handbook of Hume , edited by 
Paul Russell, 82–108. New York: Oxford University Press, 2016.
Millican, Peter. “Hume’s Sceptical Doubts concerning Induction.” In Reading Hume 
on Human Understanding , edited by Peter Millican, 107–73. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 2002.
Millican, Peter. “Hume’s ‘Scepticism’ about Induction.” In The Continuum Companion to 
Hume , edited by Alan Bailey and Dan O’Brien, 57–103. London: Continuum, 2012.
Millican, Peter. “Twenty Questions about Hume’s ‘Of Miracles.’” In Philosophy and 
Religion: Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement  68, edited by Anthony O’Hear, 
151–92. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 201 1.
Noonan, Harold W. Hume on Knowledge . London: Routledge, 1999.
Reid, Thomas. Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man . Edinburgh, 1785.
Stroud, Barry. Hume . London: Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1977.