Chapter 6
Hume’s Chief Argument
Peter Millican
I Skepticism, Empiricism, Naturalism, 
and Irreligion
David Hume’s philosophy is complex and multifaceted, generating considerable debate 
over which themes within it should be seen as dominant. Historically, most of his crit -
ics have viewed him as a negative skeptic  who either deliberately sets out to show the 
weaknesses and contradictions in human reason,1 or else is driven to do so by follow -
ing through the logical implications of his philosophical premises.2 Prominent among 
these premises is the concept-empiricist  assumption inherited from Locke, which 
Hume expresses as his Copy Principle, that all ideas are derived from impressions   
(T 1.1.1.7/4; EU 2.5/19). But this is not in itself a skeptical principle, and some interpret -
ers have seen it as providing the keystone of a more constructive philosophy.3 Another 
very prominent theme in Hume’s work is his “ Attempt to introduce the experimental 
Method of Reasoning into Moral Subjects. ” In accordance with this ambitious subtitle, 
the Treatise  aspires to lay the groundwork of a science of human nature that can explain 
cognitive operations (such as factual belief and the apprehension of external objects) in 
terms of the association of ideas, enabling Hume to be seen as an associationist  or early 
cognitive scientist .4 Although the associationism fades in his later works,5 Hume’s epis-
temic-empiricist  commitment to the “experimental” science of man remains a pervasive 
theme in virtually all of his philosophy, including the two Enquiries  and Dissertation on 
the Passions , the essays on politics, economics, and aesthetics, and his various contribu -
tions to the philosophy of religion. This strong Humean commitment to moral science is 
often described in terms of his “naturalism. ”
Hume is a thoroughgoing naturalist  in at least three senses of that ambiguous word. 
First, he aims for a natural  science of human thought and behavior, appealing to down-
to-earth causal mechanisms (such as association) rather than any supposed tran -
scendental insight or psychic powers—this has been called explanatory naturalism . Hume’s Chief Argument   83
Second, his science of man places us squarely in the natural world alongside the other 
animals, a point emphasized strongly by his explicit comparisons between humans 
and animals, and by the prominence of these sections within the Treatise .6 Perhaps 
the most appropriate name for this is biological naturalism .7 Third, Hume argues 
vigorously against “invisible intelligent powers, ”8 and shows hostility to all forms of 
established religion: this is anti-supernaturalism . He is also commonly thought to be a 
naturalist in yet a fourth sense, appealing to the naturalness of certain beliefs or meth -
ods of reasoning as vindicating  them against skepticism—what we might call justifi -
catory naturalism . But this is controversial, and it is unclear whether Hume sees the 
resistance of our beliefs to skeptical attack—where this derives from human inability 
to resist the blind force of nature rather than from our own rational powers—as the 
defeat  of skepticism or rather, its victory :
I may, nay I must yield to the current of nature, in submitting to my senses and 
understanding; and in this blind submission I shew most perfectly my sceptical dis -
position and principles. (T 1.4.7.10/269)
Here, at least, Hume presents no conflict  between his skeptical and naturalist orienta -
tions, and is perhaps best understood as intending his analysis of the human intellectual 
condition to give both skepticism and natural instinct their due, without declaring vic -
tory for either of them.
Hume’s naturalism—in yet a fifth sense which combines various elements of these 
others—is enduringly associated with Norman Kemp Smith, who played a major 
role in challenging the previously dominant trend of skeptical interpretation. Taking 
his cue from Hume’s notoriously provocative claim that “Reason is, and ought only to 
be the slave of the passions” (T 2.3.3.4/415), he argued that “the determining factor in 
Hume’s philosophy” is “the establishment of a purely naturalistic conception of human 
nature by the thorough subordination of reason to feeling and instinct” (Kemp Smith 
1905: 150). On this reading, instinctive practice dominates theoretical reason, and “our 
ultimate and unalterable tendencies to action are the test of practical truth and falsity” 
(1905: 156). The primary concern for Kemp Smith’s Hume is moral  philosophy, and the 
guiding principle of his system—what we might call sentimentalist naturalism —is an 
extension to the theoretical realm of the moral sentimentalism that he learned from 
Francis Hutcheson. Just as our natural moral sentiments can provide a basis for moral 
commitment, so our fundamental commitments to the external world and to objective 
causality are explained as “natural beliefs” grounded on “the ultimate instincts or pro -
pensities that constitute our human nature” and which are “thus removed beyond the 
reach of our sceptical doubts” (1905: 151, 152). In this way, naturalistic feeling trumps 
skeptical reason.
Kemp Smith’s legacy of naturalistic interpretation was developed further by Barry 
Stroud, who argued explicitly for the predominance of Hume’s naturalism over both 
his skepticism and his concept empiricism (1977: 76–77, 219–224). And Kemp Smith’s 
influence continues to be evident in the work of more recent scholars, some of whom 84   Peter Millican
(like Stroud) repeat approvingly his improbable speculation that Hume wrote the bulk 
of Treatise  Book 3 before Book 1, his philosophical system having grown from the basis 
of a Hutchesonian moral theory.9
It is a shame that Kemp Smith himself—like most who followed his lead—never care -
fully analyzed his key term “naturalism” or teased apart its various strands to clarify its 
relationship with “skepticism” (which also, as Hume himself stressed, comes in several 
varieties). Hume’s explanatory naturalism, manifest in his efforts towards a “science of 
man, ” coheres closely with his biological naturalism and anti-supernaturalism. But jus-
tificatory naturalism  fits far less straightforwardly with any of these, because treating 
beliefs as justified in virtue of their naturalness could easily point towards supernatural -
ism and the view of humans as semi-divine, both of which apparently come quite natu -
rally to us (if cognitive science of religion is anything to go by, cf. Thornhill-Miller and 
Millican, 2015). Likewise, Kemp Smith’s sentimentalist naturalism , subordinating reason 
to feeling, seems positively contrary to Hume’s scientific ambitions.10 For this crucially 
privileges “the ordinary consciousness”—embracing the two vulgar “natural beliefs” 
that our perceptions are independent objects and that external objects somehow con -
tain a “feeling of necessitated transition” (1905: 158–159, 161–162)—in such a way as to 
make these immune to attack, even when that attack is in the service of Hume’s science of 
man . Hume himself is clear that the vulgar belief in independently continuing percep -
tions is false  (T 1.4.2.45/210–11; EU 12.9/152), while his account of how the mind “spreads 
itself on external objects” when ascribing necessity to them is the dismissive explaining 
away of an erroneous objection to his theory, not a central part of it (T 1.3.14.25/167).11 If 
Hume really did view these as privileged “natural beliefs” in the way that Kemp Smith 
claims, then his declared ambition to lay the groundwork of an objective science that 
might “discover, at least in some degree, the secret springs and principles, by which the 
human mind is actuated in its operations” (EU 1.15/14; cf. T Intro. 6–8/xvi–xvii) seems 
fatally compromised. In short, Kemp Smith’s sentimentalist naturalism, by systemati -
cally elevating feeling over reason, may “defeat skepticism” to the very minimal extent of 
insulating our vulgar everyday beliefs, but in the more significant battle between scien -
tific irrationalism (e.g., the claim that science has no more rational warrant than super -
stition) and naturalistic moral science, it is on the wrong side.
We have seen that there are serious dangers of misrepresentation in categorizing 
Hume as a “naturalist, ” and it is also far too simplistic to think of his philosophical ori -
entation as involving a balancing act between “naturalism” and “skepticism. ” Some of his 
naturalistic aims conflict with certain types of skepticism but at the same time cohere 
very well with other types, so we must be sensitive to these nuances and avoid the temp -
tation to pigeonhole Hume into crude contemporary categories. If we seek for a more 
plausible simple label for Hume’s philosophy, combining appropriate elements of both 
naturalism and skepticism, then Paul Russell (2008) has recently suggested irreligion , 
focusing on the hostility to religion which is central to Hume’s anti-supernaturalism, 
and yet which also counts as seriously skeptical from the point of view of Hume’s con -
temporaries and early critics. Russell’s interpretation has considerable merit, for as we 
shall see, there is plenty of evidence that Hume had religious concerns from early in his Hume’s Chief Argument   85
life (plausibly providing the main impetus for his interest in philosophy), and much of 
his writing is either overtly or covertly antitheistic. But “irreligion” is a very broad theme, 
and my aim here is to capture the specific  ways in which Hume’s philosophy developed 
and the particular arguments that attracted him. Even though religion is indeed com -
monly in his sights, he often pursues an independent philosophical agenda of his own, 
and he is certainly no indiscriminate peddler of anti-religious arguments.
A narrower version of the irreligious interpretation was proposed by Edward Craig 
(1987), who argued that Hume’s primary target is the Judaeo-Christian “Image of God” 
doctrine or “Similarity Thesis” that man—and most importantly his epistemic faculty 
of reason—is made in the image of God. Opposition to this thesis nicely combines 
biological naturalism with skepticism about human reason, and Hume would indeed 
have been fundamentally opposed to any such assertion of human quasi-divinity. 
But beyond this obvious point, Craig’s interpretation has little solid basis, because 
although there is a profusion of evidence for Hume’s general irreligion, not only in his 
explicitly anti-religious works but also in the Treatise ,12 there are very few of his texts 
that can plausibly be interpreted as specifically  targeting the Image of God doctrine.13 
Most of these few, moreover, occur when he is criticizing the Design Argument, whose 
whole point is to argue for a Deity analogous to the human mind; hence such pas -
sages are easily explained by Hume’s opposition to that argument without any need 
to hypothesize some deeper and more general antipathy to the Similarity Thesis. In 
default of much direct textual support, therefore, Craig’s evidence for his interpreta -
tion is almost all indirect,14 but what he supplies looks very insubstantial, especially 
in the light of subsequent scholarship. Most specifically, he argues (1987: 77–84) that 
a focus on the Image of God doctrine would naturally lead to Hume’s operating with 
a deductivist conception of reason within the famous argument concerning induc -
tion, as was then commonly supposed; but more recent work has convincingly refuted 
this supposition.15 Craig goes on to examine three of Hume’s other best-known 
discussions—on the idea of necessary connexion, the two definitions of cause, and 
personal identity—which he thinks make little sense on the rival interpretation that 
Hume is an “embryonic positivist” for whom the analytical Copy Principle (rather 
than the epistemically-focused Similarity Thesis) is of central importance (1987: 121). 
Again, his case now looks relatively weak in the light of more recent scholarship,16 and 
anyway virtually none of what Craig says here points strongly towards the Image of 
God doctrine: so even if he is right to see Hume’s overtly analytical discussions as con -
fused in various ways, his suggestion that the Similarity Thesis lies behind the con -
fusion is mere speculation until backed up with substantial and specific evidence. 
Meanwhile, we have good reason for distrusting any interpretation that so fundamen -
tally turns on the idea that Hume is muddled in putting such an emphasis on his Copy 
Principle, a problem which Craig acknowledges:
it remains obscure what motive [Hume] can have had for being hospitable, even to 
the extent that he was, to the theory of ideas and impressions, and I am driven to an 
explanation of the fact in terms of an early enthusiasm for Locke and the “way of 86   Peter Millican
ideas. ” Hume never got it out of his system, or realised how little, deep down, it actu -
ally meant to him. (1987: 123)
Craig thus follows Stroud in taking Hume’s concept-empiricist commitments to be rel -
atively shallow, despite Hume’s enthusiastic highlighting of his Copy Principle in the 
Treatise , the Abstract , and the Enquiry , and his continued defence of it (cf. Section III 
below). There is a strong whiff of philosophical fashion here, whereby just as commen -
tators in the heyday of positivism were inclined to overstress Hume’s concept empiri -
cism, so more recent scholars have been inclined to dismiss it as a mildly embarrassing 
Lockean legacy. Far more satisfactory than either extreme would be a more balanced 
view that can explain why Hume was so conspicuously attracted to the Copy Principle, 
even though his interests indeed seem, on the whole, to be epistemological and 
anti-religious rather than analytical.
II The Biographical Background of 
Hume’s Philosophy
In attempting to construct a more balanced account of the fundamentals of Hume’s phi -
losophy, it will be helpful to start by reviewing briefly what we know of his background 
and intellectual context, delegating further detail to M. A. Stewart’s useful 2005 paper 
on “Hume’s Intellectual Development, 1711–1752. ” As Stewart illustrates from various 
sources, Hume’s philosophy teaching at Edinburgh University, which he attended from 
1721 until 1725 (aged between 10 and 14), would have been traditional and even reaction -
ary, delivered in Latin, thoroughly infused with religion, and generally unlikely to have 
inspired his interest (2005: 11–16, 19–25). After university, living mainly at the family 
home at Chirnside (eight miles west of Berwick) and neglecting his intended legal stud -
ies, Hume became a voracious reader of classical authors such as Cicero, Virgil, Seneca, 
and Plutarch (Stewart, 2005: 28–29). These classical interests would have been encour -
aged by his reading of Shaftesbury’s Characteristicks , which Hume purchased in 1726 
(Stewart 2005: 37–38). At this point his orientation seems to have been broadly Stoical, 
and it is his efforts towards the introspective Stoic ideal that he blames for the break -
down that followed his enthusiasm for the “new Scene of Thought” which “seem’ d to be 
opened up” to him in 1729 (LET 1.13). Hume’s personal experience of the failure of Stoic 
discipline seems to have encouraged him towards more down-to-earth empirical psy -
chology, in which he apparently made some progress from early in 1731, as he described 
in his well-known draft letter to a physician of March or April 1734:
I found that the moral Philosophy transmitted to us by Antiquity, labor’ d under 
the same Inconvenience that has been found in their natural Philosophy, of being 
entirely Hypothetical, & depending more upon Invention than Experience. Every Hume’s Chief Argument   87
one consulted his Fancy in erecting Schemes of Virtue & of Happiness, without 
regarding human Nature, upon which every moral Conclusion must depend. This 
therefore I resolved to make my principal Study, … I believe … that little more is 
requir’ d to make a man succeed in this Study than to throw off all Prejudices … At least 
this is all I have to depend on for the Truth of my Reasonings, which I have multiply’ d 
to such a degree, that within these three Y ears, I find I have scribbled many a Quire of 
Paper, in which there is nothing contain’ d but my own Inventions. (LET 1.16)
Perhaps Hume’s skepticism towards previous philosophers was also fostered by his 
reading of Pierre Bayle, who is mentioned in a letter of March 1732 (LET 1.12). Another 
major factor here seems to have been a loss of religious faith, which we know about 
principally from a 1751 letter to Gilbert Elliot of Minto and the 1776 deathbed interview 
recorded by James Boswell. In the letter, which invites Elliot to help in strengthening 
the theistic arguments of the draft Dialogues , Hume tells of having recently “burn’ d an 
old Manuscript Book, wrote before I was twenty; which contain’ d, Page after Page, the 
gradual Progress of my Thoughts on that Head. ” This began “with an anxious Search 
after Arguments, to confirm the common Opinion, ”17 while “ Any Propensity … to the 
other Side, crept in upon me against my Will, ” in “a perpetual Struggle of a restless 
Imagination against Inclination” (LET 1.154). All this suggests that Hume’s progressive 
loss of faith—apparently extending until 1730 or 1731 (“before I was twenty”)—was pro -
longed and difficult, as indeed is typically the case.
In the deathbed interview with Boswell, Hume said that he was “religious when he 
was young, ” but that “the Morality of every Religion was bad” and “he never had enter -
tained any belief in Religion since he began to read Locke and Clarke” (Boswell 1931: 76). 
There is clear irony here, in that Hume lost belief when reading these two defenders  of 
theism, and the pairing is suggestive, because both John Locke and Samuel Clarke were 
prominent advocates of a particular form of Cosmological Argument for God’s exis -
tence, in which they drew upon the principle that matter and motion alone cannot give 
rise to thought.18 This connection is confirmed by the one mention of Clarke in Hume’s 
Treatise , in a footnote to T 1.3.3.5/80, which is followed in the very next paragraph by 
a footnote mentioning Locke. For here Hume attacks their arguments for the Causal 
Maxim that “ whatever begins to exist, must have a cause of existence ” (T 1.3.3.1/78), 
which is the other fundamental principle of their Cosmological Argument (e.g., Locke, 
Essay  IV x 3; Clarke 1732: 8–9). Although the Treatise  prudently makes no mention of 
this irreligious connection, it was not lost on the author of the anonymous 1745 pam -
phlet to which Hume’s Letter from a Gentleman  was a response: the second “Charge” it 
lays against him, after “1. Universal Scepticism, ” is “2. Principles leading to downright 
Atheism, by denying the Doctrine of Causes and Effects, … he maintains, that the 
Necessity of a Cause to every Beginning of Existence is not founded on any Arguments 
demonstrative or intuitive” (LG 15).19
Hume’s interest in Locke and Clarke probably came not from his formal stud -
ies (Stewart 2005: 16), but through his friendship with Henry Home, a distant cousin 
whose family home at Kames was only nine miles southwest of Chirnside. Home—who 88   Peter Millican
later became Lord Kames and is now most commonly known by that name—was 
born in 1696, and as a philosophically minded lawyer, he seems to have taken young 
David under his wing at Edinburgh. During 1723, Kames will no doubt have talked to 
the twelve-year-old student about the debates he was then pursuing through corre -
spondence with Samuel Clarke and Clarke’s most prominent Scottish follower Andrew 
Baxter (who also resided in the Scottish borders, six miles west of Chirnside at Duns). 
We know from Boswell that around that time Kames also grappled with Locke’s Essay , 
of which “The chapter on Power  crucified him” (Boswell 1932: 273). A particular focus of 
Locke’s chapter, as of Kames’s correspondence with Clarke, was the topic of free will and 
necessity, so it seems safe to assume that Kames would likewise have taken a keen inter -
est in the prominent controversy on this topic between Clarke and Anthony Collins, 
which had occurred in 1717 through the publication of Collins’s Philosophical Inquiry 
concerning Human Liberty  and Clarke’s responding Remarks .20 Some years later, echoes 
of this debate came to Hume’s own doorstep when, in 1732, William Dudgeon, a tenant 
farmer residing near Coldstream (eight miles south of Chirnside) published The State 
of the Moral World Consider’ d , a dialogue promoting necessitarian optimism which was 
sharply answered by Andrew Baxter, provoking Dudgeon’s prosecution for heresy by the 
Chirnside Presbytery where Hume’s uncle George Home was minister.21 In opposition, 
Baxter explicitly champions the views of Clarke, a “great Man” and “the best Defender 
of Liberty” (1732: 27 n.), and insinuates that Dudgeon is an admirer of “Mr. L—z” and 
“Mr. C—ns” (i.e., Leibniz and Collins) (1732: 35). It seems certain that Hume would have 
heard of these dramatic events, and the natural expectation that they would leave some 
mark on him—then just twenty-one but already moving on from his religious crisis to 
the philosophical thoughts that would lead to the Treatise —is at least corroborated by 
the similarity of his views on “liberty and necessity” to those of Collins.
Dudgeon’s prosecution for heretical views on free will and necessity highlights the 
religious significance of these topics, which were far from narrowly theoretical.22 Seeing 
human behavior as causally necessitated generates tensions with religious belief in a 
number of ways, not only by favoring explanatory and biological naturalism, but, more 
specifically, by making it hard to absolve any supposed divine Creator of responsibil -
ity for the apparent imperfections of His creation (unless, like Leibniz and Dudgeon, 
one is prepared to see that creation as actually the best of all possible worlds). We know 
that Hume had an intense early interest in the Problem of Evil from a recently discov -
ered manuscript fragment which seems part of a much longer discussion (Stewart 1994). 
Moreover, the Free Will Defence is one of the main topics in his “early memoranda” 
on philosophy, apparently written at about the same time as the Treatise  was published. 
One memorandum, for example, says:
Liberty not a proper Solution of Moral Ill: Because it might have been bound down 
by Motives like those of Saints & Angels. Id. [King].23
To provide a solution to the Problem of Evil, free will must be such that God—in giving it 
to his creatures—ipso facto becomes unable to ensure in advance that they will be freely Hume’s Chief Argument   89
virtuous (for otherwise, He has no excuse for failing to ensure this). Hume here points 
out that if “Saints & Angels” can freely act virtuously from good motives (as orthodoxy 
maintains, especially in respect of the heavenly afterlife), then God cannot be excused 
from the problem of “Moral Ill” by appeal to “Liberty, ” because He could have made all 
His creatures such that they likewise freely acted virtuously from good motives. There 
seems little doubt that Hume had this point in mind when he came to compose Enquiry  
Section 8, with its compatibilist account of free will that makes it impossible to absolve 
God from the wickedness of His creation (EU 8.36/103).
III Causation and the Copy Principle
So far, we have seen that Hume had strong personal reasons to be skeptical about the 
classical and Christian moralists on whom he had been raised, and that this skepticism 
gave him a resolve to make “human Nature” his “principal Study” and to base that study 
on “Experience” rather than “Invention. ” Contemporary views of human nature were 
overwhelmingly bound up with the Christian conception of the universe and man’s 
place in it, but by the age of twenty Hume had rejected religion—probably for both 
metaphysical and moral reasons—and was seeking a science of man that would be quite 
independent of it. We have here a strong nexus of influences that provide a promising 
explanation of many of the general tendencies of Hume’s philosophy, from skepticism  
about established orthodoxies, explanatory naturalism  and epistemic empiricism  in the 
quest for an observational science of human nature, and biological naturalism  both from 
seeing human nature as a subject of empirical study, and from anti-supernaturalism  
consequent on his loss of faith and revulsion for religious ethics. But more specifically, 
it is remarkable how this intellectual journey had taken him through such a significant 
cluster of topics associated with causation : the Cosmological Argument, the attempts 
of Locke and Clarke to establish both the Causal Maxim and the principle that thought 
cannot arise from matter, Kames’s correspondence with Clarke and Baxter and his 
struggles over Locke’s “chapter on Power , ” and the prominent and locally salient debates 
about free will and necessity. All this, I suggest, does much to explain Hume’s obvious 
preoccupation with the idea of causation in his theoretical philosophy.
Turning now to the shape of Hume’s early philosophy as we find it in the Treatise , we 
are struck in the very first section by the prominence that he gives to his Copy Principle 
“that all our simple ideas in their first appearance are deriv’ d from simple impressions, 
which are correspondent to them, and which they exactly represent” (T 1.1.1.7/4). Hume 
trumpets this as his “first principle” (T 1.1.1.12/7 cf. T App. 6/626) and later extols its 
philosophical value (T 1.2.3.1/33; cf. TA 7/648). Moreover, he remains equally attached 
to it in his later writings,24 although it does not yet fit neatly into the picture we have 
been building of his philosophy and its background. As we shall see, however, there is 
a straightforward and elegant way of integrating it into that picture, if we allow our -
selves one undocumented—but highly plausible—speculation. Namely, that Hume was 90   Peter Millican
strongly motivated at an early stage by the prospect of applying Locke’s concept empiricism 
to settle the debate over free will and necessity through clarifying and delimiting what could 
possibly be meant by causal “necessity. ”  Certainly Hume did in fact so apply his Copy 
Principle, which he acknowledges to be a reformulation of Locke’s denial of innate ideas 
(TA 6/647–8). What remains to be explained is how such an application would naturally 
have enticed the young philosopher.
Like most of his British philosophical contemporaries, Hume appears to have 
accepted Locke’s concept empiricism relatively uncritically: in both the Treatise  and the 
Enquiry  he gives arguments to support it, but they are rather perfunctory and unsatis -
factory, evincing little inclination to dig deeper.25 The attraction of the Copy Principle 
as a weapon against bogus ideas (e.g., of Cartesian or scholastic souls or essences) is 
obvious enough, but what really excites Hume is the analytical bounty that he intends to 
draw from it:
Our author thinks, “that no discovery cou’ d have been made more happily for decid -
ing all controversies concerning ideas …” Accordingly, wherever any idea is ambigu -
ous, he has always recourse to the impression, which must render it clear and precise. 
(TA 7/648–9; cf. EU 2.9/21–2)
We shall probably never know which ideas first came under Hume’s scrutiny in this way, 
although his self-quoted words in the Abstract  passage above—taken from T 1.2.3.1/33—
may reflect the joy of new discovery when analyzing our ideas of space and time, most 
likely in response to Bayle’s discussion of Zeno’s paradoxes of infinite divisibility.26 But at 
some stage early in his philosophical development, as we have seen, it is very likely that 
Kames would have drawn Hume’s attention to Locke’s “chapter on Power , ” which begins 
as follows:
The Mind, being every day informed, by the Senses, of the alteration of those simple 
Ideas , it observes in things without; and taking notice how one comes to an end, and 
ceases to be, and another begins to exist, which was not before; reflecting also on 
what passes within itself, … and concluding from what it has so constantly observed 
to have been, that the like Changes will for the future be made, in the same things, by 
like Agents, and by the like ways, considers in one thing the possibility of having any 
of its simple Ideas  changed, and in another the possibility of making that change; and 
so comes by that Idea which we call Power . (Essay  II xxi 1)
As Hume points out in both the Treatise  and the Enquiry , however, “this explication is 
more popular than philosophical” (T 1.3.14.5/157) because “no reasoning can ever give 
us a new, original, simple idea; as this philosopher himself confesses” (EU 7.8 n12/64 n1).  
Having noticed the flaw in Locke’s “explication, ” Hume would no doubt be keen to 
develop his own more rigorous account, soon realizing the difficulties involved and the 
futility of attempting to define power  using other equally problematic causal terms such 
as efficacy . Ultimately, of course, this led to his now famous analysis in Treatise  1.3.14, Hume’s Chief Argument   91
which begins by observing “that the terms of efficacy, agency, power, force, energy, neces -
sity, connexion , and productive quality , are all nearly synonimous” (T 1.3.14.4/157),27 and 
which then goes on to identify the source of the crucial idea as an impression of reflec -
tion before culminating in Hume’s two “definitions of cause” (T 1.3.14.31/169–70; cf. T 
2.3.2.4/409–10).
Suppose now that Hume, having contemplated this issue at least in general terms, 
came to consider the debate between Clarke and Collins, perhaps in the context of the 
Dudgeon affair. This debate involves a conceptual  disagreement about the meaning of 
“necessity, ” Collins equating this with deterministic predictability and ascribing it to 
human actions as well as physical events (1717: 110–111).28 In response, Clarke makes 
clear that his own conception of genuine necessity is very different, involving not mere 
predictability but something like mechanical impulse , whereas by contrast the “moral 
necessity” which characterizes human behavior 
is not indeed any Necessity  at all; but ’tis merely a figurative Manner of Speaking  … 
But now [Collins] makes Moral Necessity  and Physical Necessity  to be exactly and 
Philosophically the same Thing … In which Matter, the Author is guilty of a dou -
ble Absurdity. First , in supposing Reasons  or Motives  … to make the same neces -
sary Impulse  upon Intelligent  Subjects, as Matter in Motion  does upon unintelligent 
Subjects ; which is supposing Abstract Notions  to be Substances . And Secondly , in 
endeavouring to impose it upon his Reader as a thing taken for granted , that Moral 
Necessity  and Physical Necessity  do not differ intrinsically in their own Nature . 
(Clarke 1717: 15–16)
Hume sides with Collins and has ample motive for doing so, both irreligious and natu -
ralistic (as we saw earlier). But he also wields a novel and powerful weapon, in the form 
of his own analysis of causation:
We may learn from the foregoing [two definitions], that all causes are of the same 
kind, … The same course of reasoning will make us conclude, that there is but one kind 
of necessity , … and that the common distinction betwixt moral  and physical  necessity 
is without any foundation in nature. This clearly appears from the precedent explica -
tion of necessity. ’Tis the constant conjunction of objects, along with the determina -
tion of the mind, which constitutes a physical necessity: And the removal of these is 
the same thing with chance … . ’tis impossible to admit of any medium betwixt chance 
and an absolute necessity. (T 1.3.14.32–3/170–1)
In the Treatise , Hume does not immediately point out the consequences for human 
free will, but quickly presents another fruit of his analysis, namely, confirmation that the 
Causal Maxim—the main foundation of Clarke’s Cosmological Argument—cannot be 
“founded on any arguments either demonstrative or intuitive”:
If we define a cause to be, An object precedent and contiguous to another, and where all 
the objects resembling the former are plac’ d in a like relation of priority and contiguity 92   Peter Millican
to those objects, that resemble the latter ; we may easily conceive, that there is no abso -
lute nor metaphysical necessity, that every beginning of existence shou’ d be attended 
with such an object. (T 1.3.14.35/172)
In a similar spirit, he later exploits the same definition to refute that other key principle 
of Clarke’s Cosmological Argument, that matter and motion could not possibly give rise 
to thought:
we are never sensible of any connexion betwixt causes and effects, and … ’tis only by 
our experience of their constant conjunction, we can arrive at any knowledge of this 
relation. Now as all objects, which are not contrary, are susceptible of a constant con -
junction, and as no real objects are contrary; I have inferr’ d from these principles [cf. 
T 1.3.15.1/173], that to consider the matter a priori , anything may produce anything, 
and that we shall never discover a reason, why any object may or may not be the 
cause of any other … [W] e find by the comparing their ideas, that thought and motion 
are different from each other, and by experience, that they are constantly united; 
which being all the circumstances, that enter into the idea of cause and effect, when 
apply’ d to the operations of matter, we may certainly conclude, that motion may be, 
and actually is, the cause of thought and perception. (T 1.4.5.30/247–8)
Thus Hume’s analysis of causation has the direct implication that causes and effects can 
be discovered only through experience, delivering both a vindication of empirical sci -
ence and a devastating blow against a priori metaphysics. But an even more important 
implication—because hard to establish in any other way—is revealed when he returns to 
the territory of Clarke and Collins in Treatise  2.3.1–2 on the crucial question of “liberty 
and necessity. ” Here, Hume’s two definitions of cause yield parallel definitions of causal 
necessity  (T 2.3.2.4/409–10; cf. T 2.3.1.4/400–1), capturing all that we can mean by the 
term. Then, because human actions satisfy the definitions, it immediately follows that 
those actions are as necessary as the motion of billiard balls. Clarke and his allies will 
object that human actions lack genuine physical  necessity, but the upshot of Hume’s anal -
ysis is that they are using terms without meaning: their supposed distinction between 
moral  and physical  necessity (as Hume has already observed at T 1.3.14.32–3) can be con -
signed to the same metaphysical dustbin as scholastic substances:
this reasoning puts the whole controversy in a new light, by giving a new defini -
tion of necessity. And, indeed, the most zealous advocates for free-will [e.g. Clarke] 
must allow this union and inference with regard to human actions. They will only 
deny, that this makes the whole of necessity. But then they must shew, that we have 
an idea of something else [i.e. whatever it is that characterises “physical” necessity] 
in the actions of matter, which, according to the foregoing reasoning, is impossible.  
(TA 34/661)
Hume’s application of his Copy Principle to the idea of causal necessity thus both 
brings human behavior within the reach of deterministic causal science,29 and Hume’s Chief Argument   93
triumphantly solves “the question of liberty and necessity; the most contentious ques -
tion, of metaphysics, the most contentious science” (EU 8.23/95). We now have a very 
satisfying answer—firmly rooted in his biography and early writings—to the puzzle of 
why Hume put such emphasis on his Copy Principle and gave it pride of place as the 
“first principle” of his philosophy. Through its application to the idea of causal necessity, 
his concept empiricism turns out to be closely integrated with his other main theoretical 
commitments and purposes, providing a support for explanatory and biological natu -
ralism, a refutation of causal apriorism in favor of epistemic empiricism, and a further 
multiple attack on supernaturalism by undermining the principles of the Cosmological 
Argument and of the Free Will Defence.30
In recent years, it has become fashionable to play down Hume’s commitment 
to the Copy Principle, in line with the declining popularity of concept empiricism 
noted at the end of Section I above. Indeed the “skeptical realist” or “New Hume” 
interpretation—developed mostly by John Wright, Edward Craig, and Galen Strawson, 
but since attracting others—centers on the claim that Hume is content to allow mean -
ingful (and potentially truth-apt) thought in the absence of impression-derived ideas. 
This claim has some textual support in respect of topics such as the external world, 
where Hume accounts for our thinking in terms of “fictions” that result from asso -
ciational confusion (rather than bona fide ideas). But in the case of causation, Hume 
is always very explicit that his analysis delivers both a genuine idea—copied from an 
impression—and two definitions that are precise enough to yield the host of valuable 
philosophical results that we have just seen. The “skeptical realist” reading of Hume on 
causation has, I believe, seemed plausible only because its advocates have systematically 
avoided addressing those passages where Hume exploits his analysis for philosophi -
cal gain, most notably his discussions of materialism (at T 1.4.5.29–33) and “liberty and 
necessity” (in T 2.3.1–2; TA. 31–4/660–1; and EU 8). If the account just sketched is cor -
rect, however, this amounts to a fundamental reversal of Hume’s own priorities.31
IV The Formation of Treatise  
Book 1 Parts 1–3
Hume’s enthusiasm for the Copy Principle explains and structures much of the early 
content of Treatise  Book 1.  Impressions can arise from either sensation  or reflection   
(T 1.1.2), with ideas their precise copies (albeit having less “force and vivacity”). It follows 
that ideas are quasi-sensory and must be determinate; hence thought involving general -
ity requires an appropriate treatment of “abstract ideas” (cf. T 1.1.7.5/19). Combined with 
Hume’s sensory atomism—which provides the basis for his treatment of space and time 
and his solution to the paradoxes of infinite divisibility—this also means that complex 
ideas are susceptible of literal division and rearrangement, thus explaining the other -
wise puzzling jump from what at first seems like a harmless “second principle, of the 94   Peter Millican
liberty of the imagination to transpose and change its ideas”  (T 1.1.3.4/10), to a full-blown 
Separability Principle (T 1.1.7.3/18–9) which is far less innocuous and goes on to play a 
major role in the Part 2 treatment of space and time (and later generates problems in 
Part 4).
Interleaved with all this analysis and metaphysics is a more epistemological stream 
of thought, starting with the association of ideas (T 1.1.4) and a taxonomy of relations 
(T 1.1.5), in preparation for the treatment of “knowledge and probability” in Part 3. 
Here Hume saw the prospect for another neat theory, based on the observation that 
all inferences “from one object to another” rely on causation and are at best probable , 
while demonstrative  inferences tend to be confined to mathematics. This invited the 
tempting thought that mental operations can be categorized in terms of the relations 
involved, with resemblance, contrariety,  and degrees in quality  corresponding to intu -
ition (T 1.3.1.2/70); proportions of quantity or number  to demonstration (T 1.3.1.3/70); 
identity  and relations of time and place  to perception (T 1.3.2.2/73–4); and causation  to 
probable inference (T 1.3.2.3/74). With this in mind, Hume (T 1.1.5.2/14) shoehorns the 
multiplicity of relations that Locke had painstakingly identified ( Essay  II xxv–xxviii) 
into just seven categories.32 Later in the Treatise  Hume twice appeals to this taxonomy, 
to prove the non-demonstrability of the Causal Maxim (T 1.3.3.2/79) and of morality 
(T 3.1.1.19/463–4). Sadly this whole theory is seriously flawed, but fortunately the bulk 
of the Treatise  is unaffected because Hume mostly relies instead on a far more plausible 
criterion of demonstrability, namely, the Conceivability Principle. However the theory 
plays a significant role in shaping Book 1 Part 3, which although entitled “Of Knowledge 
and Probability, ” is mainly framed by Hume’s analysis of the causal relation informed by 
the Copy Principle (from T 1.3.2.3/74 to T 1.3.15.11/175).33 Within this overarching frame -
work, Hume inserts his discussions of the Causal Maxim (T 1.3.3) and of causal inference 
(T 1.3.4–7), but both are presented as “neighbouring fields” (T 1.3.2.13/77–8) to his main 
analytical business. His famous argument concerning induction in T 1.3.6 shows that 
the assumption of uniformity which induction presupposes cannot be established on 
any independent rational basis, instead being taken for granted through the instinctive 
operation of custom  (or habit). But it is striking, in view of this argument’s subsequent 
fame, how cursory and relatively muted it is here, set within a section whose main role 
seems to be to reveal constant conjunction  as the key to causal ascription, as another step 
towards analysis of the causal relation (with T 1.3.6.3 echoing T 1.3.2.11). When Hume 
reassessed the 1739 Treatise  in his Abstract  (composed only nine months or so later), the 
famous argument was elevated from this humble role to become the centerpiece of his 
theoretical philosophy, as it remained in the Enquiry  of 1748 and has been considered 
ever since. So what we find in Treatise  Book 1 Part 3, apparently, is an organizational 
structure that reflects the development of Hume’s ideas rather than their maturely con -
sidered arrangement. And this strongly corroborates our hypothesis, that he came to his 
theoretical philosophy predominantly through an interest in the analysis of causation 
rather than in the epistemological assessment of induction.
When Hume does finally turn explicitly to the assessment of “probable reason -
ings”—again in a long detour (or series of detours) from his search for the source of the Hume’s Chief Argument   95
idea of necessary connexion—his discussion is scientific rather than skeptical in tone. 
T 1.3.8 provides experimental support for his analysis of belief in terms of the transfer 
of vivacity by customary association (typically from the impression of a cause to the 
idea of its experienced effect); T 1.3.9 explains why the vivacity of belief arises from 
causation rather than from other relations; T 1.3.10 discusses the mutual influence of 
belief on the passions and imagination; T 1.3.11 explains “the probability of chances” 
and T 1.3.12 “the probability of causes, ” both involving the division of force and vivac -
ity where there is a multiplicity of associational links; while T 1.3.13 discusses “unphi -
losophical probability” prior to Hume’s belated return—at T 1.3.14—to his analysis of 
the idea of causation (on hold, apparently, since T 1.3.6). These intervening sections 
include numerous remarks describing the various factors that bear on our judgments 
of probability, many of which can also be construed as normative: highlighting fac -
tors that ought  (or ought not ) to bear on such judgments. The overall message here is in 
favor of basing our beliefs on experience, drawing causal inferences through custom 
in line with the constant conjunctions that we have observed, and assigning probabili -
ties based on statistical regularities. Probable reasoning accordingly merits categoriza -
tion amongst what Hume will later call the “general and more establish’ d” operations 
of the mind (T 1.4.7.7/267–8), and beliefs thus formed deserve to be called products 
of “judgment” or “reason, ” distinguished from trivial and flighty “whimsies and preju -
dices, which are rejected under the opprobrious character of being the offspring of the 
imagination” (T 1.3.9.19 n22/117–8 n1).34 Irrationalities of the latter kind are particu -
larly associated with religion, which encourages stimulation of the imagination by such 
things as the “mummeries” of Roman Catholicism (T 1.3.8.4/99–100), saintly relics  
(T 1.3.8.6/100–1), pilgrimages (T 1.3.9.9/110–11), terrifying sermons (T 1.3.9.15/115), and 
miracle stories (T 1.3.10.4/120).
V Skepticism: Corrosive or Mitigated?
So far, we have seen nothing in Hume’s formative ideas that is corrosively skeptical , in 
the sense of undermining his scientific ambitions. Many of his views would indeed 
have been considered skeptical by his contemporaries, such as his denial of the demon -
strability of the Causal Maxim, his treatment of induction as founded on instinctive 
custom (rather than perception of evidential connexions),35 his analysis of causation 
in terms of our own inferential behavior (rather than apprehension of objective neces -
sities), and his various criticisms—either explicit or implicit—of religious claims. But 
none of this seriously threatens his own  scientific researches, as long as he is content 
to accept the deliverances of his faculties in a spirit consistent with his theory. A scien -
tist who accepts that his faculties are fallible and his discoveries less than certain does 
not thereby undermine them, except by the unrealistic standards of a wishful-thinking 
dogmatist or extreme skeptic who cannot reconcile himself to working within the limits 
of what human nature allows.96   Peter Millican
This attitude is most clearly expressed by Hume in the final section of the Enquiry  
of 1748, where he draws attention to the varieties and different degrees of skepticism 
before himself adopting a mitigated  or academic  skepticism (EU 12.24–26/161–3) 
which recognizes the fallibility of our faculties and is accordingly modest and undog -
matic, accepting that there may be limits to the range of our enquiries. He spells this 
out in respect of induction, responding to his own argument (EU 4, summarized at 
EU 12.22/153) that our most important method of reasoning about the world rests 
on a brute assumption—namely, the uniformity of nature—for which no indepen -
dent justification can be given. The rationalist and the extreme “Pyrrhonian” skeptic 
will bemoan this lack and demand a more solid basis for induction, but if none is to 
be had, then we are faced with a stark choice between giving up induction entirely 
or accepting “the whimsical condition of mankind, who must act and reason and 
believe; though they are not able, by their most diligent enquiry, to satisfy themselves 
concerning the foundation of these operations” (EU 12.23/160). Given this pragmatic 
situation, even the Pyrrhonian can offer no reason for preferring the negative choice, 
for “he must acknowledge, if he will acknowledge any thing, that all human life must 
perish, were his principles universally and steadily to prevail” (EU 12.23/160).36 The 
upshot is that as long as our investigations do not undermine  our faculties by showing 
them to be unreliable, it is entirely reasonable for us to rely on them by default.37
Relying on our faculties by default, moreover, is entirely consistent with refining our 
use of them on the basis of our investigations. Most importantly, although our general 
presumption of inductive uniformity may have to be taken for granted as indispensable 
and incapable of further support, this does not require us to accord equal authority to 
every individual inductive inference, treating thoughtless superstition (e.g., belief in a 
“lucky charm”) with as much respect as careful, disciplined scientific extrapolation. On 
the contrary, we find by experience that the former is hopelessly unreliable whereas the 
latter is highly effective, and it is important to notice that there is nothing viciously circu -
lar or fundamentally skeptical about such inductive investigation of our own inductive 
tendencies (any more than there is about empirical cognitive science in general). Much of 
Treatise  Book 1 Part 3 can be understood in this scientific spirit, and indeed Hume there 
seems almost oblivious to the possibility that he might be thought to be raising corro -
sive skeptical worries about induction.38 Only in the Enquiry  does he explicitly acknowl -
edge that his famous argument raises “sceptical doubts concerning the operations of the 
understanding, ” before going on to lay these to rest in the way that we have just seen.
The project of the Treatise  does run into serious trouble, however, when Hume’s cog -
nitive investigations ultimately lead to the conclusion that our thought is irremediably 
incoherent. As we saw earlier (cf. note 34), in analyzing human reasoning he attempts 
to draw a distinction between the “general” and “universal” principles of the mind that 
deserve our respect and the “irregular” or “trivial” ones that do not, most explicitly at 
the beginning of Treatise  1.4.4:
In order to justify myself, I must distinguish in the imagination betwixt the principles 
which are permanent, irresistable, and universal; such as the customary transition Hume’s Chief Argument   97
from causes to effects, and from effects to causes:  And the principles, which are 
changeable, weak, and irregular; … The former are the foundation of all our thoughts 
and actions, so that upon their removal human nature must immediately perish and 
go to ruin. The latter are neither unavoidable to mankind, nor necessary, or so much 
as useful in the conduct of life; but on the contrary are observ’ d only to take place in 
weak minds … (T 1.4.4.1/225)
But once Hume becomes engaged in the skeptical arguments of Book 1 Part 4, this 
distinction becomes hard to maintain, as he himself laments retrospectively in the 
concluding section T 1.4.7.39 First, at T 1.4.1.10/185, we are saved from extreme skep -
ticism not by the “general and more establish’ d” principles of the mind, but by “that 
singular and seemingly trivial property of the fancy, by which we enter with difficulty 
into remote views of things” (T 1.4.7.7/268). Second, at T 1.4.2.56/217–8, after a long 
and fraught discussion of our belief in the continued and distinct existence of external 
objects, Hume concludes that this belief is founded on “trivial qualities of the fancy” 
and on “false suppositions, ” including the “gross illusion … that our resembling percep -
tions are numerically the same. ” Third, at T 1.4.4.15/231, he finds that standard causal 
reasoning leads to the conclusion that material objects do not resemble our sensory 
impressions, which in turn makes it impossible for us to form any “satisfactory idea” 
(T 1.4.4.9/229) of them;40 thus causal reasoning and the belief in external objects, 
“tho’ these two operations be equally natural and necessary in the human mind, yet 
in some circumstances they are directly contrary” (T 1.4.7.4/266). Finally, Hume 
ultimately finds his account of personal identity in T 1.4.6 to be deeply problematic, 
based on principles that he “cannot render consistent” (T App. 21/636), although this 
recognition comes only in the Appendix  to the Treatise , published with Book 3 late in 
1740. One major source of the trouble here is Hume’s Separability Principle, which he 
takes to imply the extraordinary claim that his perceptions are independent existences 
that “may exist separately, without any contradiction or absurdity” (T App.12/634; cf.  
T 1.4.5.5/233; T 1.4.6.3/252; T 1.4.6.16/259–60).
The conclusion of Treatise  Book 1 exposes the disastrous breakdown of Hume’s 
would-be distinction between the “general” and “trivial” principles of the mind, 
making it difficult to mount any consistent defence against corrosive skepticism  
(T 1.4.7.6–8/267–9). In the end, he can do no more than appeal to our natural tendency 
to ignore skeptical worries and his own inclination towards metaphysical curios -
ity despite them (T 1.4.7.9–12/269–71). For those who share such curiosity, he suggests 
that philosophy can at least be recommended above superstition as the “safest and most 
agreeable” guide (T 1.4.7.13/271), but this defence appears lame given the obvious retort, 
that on religious principles Hume’s philosophy holds far more danger than Christianity, 
risking falsehood and eternal hellfire in place of divine truth and salvation.41 If human 
reason is as hopelessly inconsistent as Hume has portrayed, then any objective assess -
ment is beyond us, and we seem to be reduced to falling back on personal inclination, 
with selective “carelessness and in-attention” towards skeptical considerations that 
would upset our equanimity (as at T 1.4.2.57/218). The upshot is that any Christian who 98   Peter Millican
is as attracted towards his faith as Hume is towards philosophy has been given no good 
reason to reconsider.42
From the perspective on Hume’s philosophy developed earlier, we have excellent 
reason to interpret his skeptical despair in the conclusion of Treatise  Book 1 as entirely 
genuine: his project has been holed beneath the waterline, and his makeshift defence, by 
which he attempts to justify the continuation of his investigations, is palpably uncon -
vincing. Hence so far from seeing Hume as a deliberate corrosive skeptic, as so many of 
his readers have done, there is a lot to be said for Reid’s view that he is forced into such 
skepticism by his own logical rigor and the premises from which he starts.43
VI Hume’s Chief Argument and His 
Taming of Skepticism
Barely nine months after Treatise  Books 1 and 2 were published, Hume was reformu -
lating its “Chief Argument” in the Abstract , which was eventually published in March 
1740.44 His choice of topics for inclusion strongly corroborates the account given ear -
lier, whereby it is his views on inductive probability, causation, and free will that are 
most important to him. He devotes paragraphs 5–7 to the Copy Principle; 8–14 to his 
argument concerning induction; 15–25 (and 4) to custom, belief, and probability; 26 to 
the idea of cause (applying the Copy Principle); and 31–4 to free will. By contrast, just 
one paragraph each is given to skepticism (27), substance and the soul (28), geometry 
(29), the passions (30), and the association of ideas (35). Hume thus greatly emphasizes 
the positive aspects of his philosophy, somewhat playing down his skeptical doubts 
although he seems no closer to resolving them:
Our author … concludes, that we assent to our faculties, and employ our reason only 
because we cannot help it. Philosophy wou’ d render us entirely Pyrrhonian , were not 
nature too strong for it. (TA 27/657)
At much the same time, he was also preparing Book 3 of the Treatise  for publication, 
with its Appendix  bewailing the “labyrinth” into which he had been led by the conun -
drum of personal identity. So any resolution of the corrosive skepticism of Book 1 Part 4 
was still, apparently, some years away.
Such a resolution was finally achieved with the first Enquiry  of 1748, where Hume 
puts an even more systematic emphasis on his “chief argument” running from the Copy 
Principle (Section 2) through induction (4), custom and belief (5), probability (6), cau -
sation (7), and free will (8). Section 4 crucially rules out a priori knowledge of the world 
and thus establishes epistemic empiricism, after which Sections 5 to 8 all strongly sup -
port a causal understanding of human thought and behavior. This explanatory natu -
ralism is reinforced by biological naturalism in Section 9 on “the reason of animals, ” Hume’s Chief Argument   99
followed by anti-supernaturalism in the next two sections, which illustrate how Hume’s 
inductive theory can undermine superstitious beliefs by first revealing their own depen -
dence on induction and then appealing to methodological consistency.45 In this spirit, 
Section 10 explains why the inductive evidence against any reported miracle is almost 
certain to outweigh the inductive evidence for the report’s reliability, while Section 11 
points out that induction cannot justify any inference from the observed world to a 
Designer having qualities (notably justice) that are not manifested in what we observe. 
The Enquiry  is rounded off by Section 12, whose calm mitigated skepticism we have 
already discussed.
It is illuminating to see how the balanced scientific naturalism of the Enquiry —whose 
overall epistemological perspective can seem common sense today—avoids destruction 
on the skeptical rocks that sank the project of the Treatise . First, Hume omits the corro -
sive skeptical argument of T 1.4.1, perhaps recognizing its serious flaws. That argument 
depended on the idea that rational judgment must always be reflexive , in the sense of 
requiring a further judgment about our initial judgment’s reliability (T 1.4.1.5/181–2). 
But this requirement, which Hume sees as leading to a vicious regress and a continual 
diminution of probability,46 is implicitly challenged in the Enquiry  by his rejection of 
antecedent skepticism at EU 12.3/149–50. There, he points out that it is self-evidently 
hopeless to make reliance on our faculties conditional on a logically prior justification 
of them, for any would-be justification must itself rely on them. Hence, as we saw earlier, 
it is entirely reasonable to ascribe them default authority from the start, without tying 
ourselves in reflexive knots.
Second, in the Enquiry  Hume omits any discussion of identity over time, and hence 
has no occasion to repeat his allegations from the Treatise  that our ascriptions of such 
identity (either to physical objects, organisms, or persons) are radically incoherent 
and sustainable only by a “fiction of the imagination. ”47 It is tempting to surmise that 
Hume had come to see the error of his ways here, and was no longer taking for granted 
that numerical identity  over time necessarily requires qualitative invariableness .48 
Recognition of such an error might explain why he never again discusses identity in any 
of his works—thus the labyrinth of personal identity is completely unmentioned in the 
Enquiry .49
Third, in the Enquiry  Hume treats our belief in external objects as a natural instinct 
which is potentially true (as long as we are careful to distinguish objects from our per -
ceptions of them), even though we cannot provide any rational argument to support that 
belief.50 We risk incoherence if we try to conceptualize the nature  of external objects in 
terms of primary and secondary qualities (EU 12.15/154; cf. T 1.4.4), but apparently there 
is no harm in thinking of them using the merely relative idea of “a certain unknown, 
inexplicable something , as the cause of our perceptions” (EU 12.16/155; cf. T 1.2.6.9/68).
Finally, although Hume in the Enquiry  retains his beloved Copy Principle (and its 
vital application to the issues of causal necessity and free will), he no longer treats ideas 
so simplistically as sensory images that can be literally divided into independent atomic 
perceptions and rearranged. Accordingly his Separability Principle disappears, along 100   Peter Millican
with the extravagant commitment to the possibility of self-subsisting perceptions which 
made the metaphysics of the Treatise  so incredible.51
Most of these features of the Enquiry  involve omission of Treatise  material, and since 
Hume does not explicitly disavow what he omitted, we cannot be certain where his edit -
ing reflects a genuine change of mind as opposed to pragmatic silence or mere abridge -
ment. In general, the differences seem philosophically well-motivated and hence likely 
to have resulted from greater maturity and reflection. With respect to the external 
world, however, the Enquiry  account is somewhat unsatisfactory in failing to pursue dif -
ficult questions raised by the Copy Principle. Part 1 of Section 12 ends by pointing out 
that if our thinking about external objects is restricted to ideas copied from our sensa -
tions, then the merely relative notion that we can have of them as independent entities 
seems to be “so imperfect, that no sceptic will think it worth while to contend against 
it” (EU 12.16/155). This subtle phrase, however, is ambiguous, and I suspect deliberately 
so, reflecting Hume’s two minds on the issue. On the one hand, thinking of “the cause 
of our perceptions” as “a certain unknown, inexplicable something ” is so pathetically 
contentless that it hardly qualifies as a thought of a substantial object. But on the other 
hand, this lack of substantial content perfectly suits Hume’s irreligious purposes and 
his desire to cripple any ambition towards a rival metaphysics based on supposed ratio -
nal insight into the nature of matter (such as Locke’s and Clarke’s insistence that matter 
and motion cannot create thought).52 Having found a phrase that nicely captures this 
ambivalence, and without any more satisfactory philosophical resolution to offer, Hume 
allows his discussion to end here,53 with a footnote which credits Berkeley for the pre -
ceding argument about primary and secondary qualities and observes that such “merely 
sceptical” arguments typically “ admit of no answer and produce no conviction ” (EU 12.16 
n32/155 n1). This observation corresponds with his already-stated pretext for giving so 
little attention to such arguments: that they “can so little serve to any serious purpose”  
(EU 12.15/154). Thus Hume apparently wants to rise above extreme skepticism even 
when he has no satisfactory philosophical answer to it.54
VII Conclusion: Hume’s Consistent 
Purposes
If this account is on the right lines, then Hume’s philosophy has a consistent under -
lying core, which probably first started to crystallize when he brought his concept 
empiricism—the Copy Principle—to bear on a cluster of issues involving causation. 
But his ultimate aim here was not merely to analyze concepts, and he was motivated 
more by the valuable corollaries that he saw flowing from his definition of causal neces -
sity: bringing human thought and behavior within the reach of causal science, refuting 
the supposed apriority of the Causal Maxim, and concluding that causal relations (and 
hence the properties of matter) can be known only through experience. These results Hume’s Chief Argument   101
also struck heavily against Christian orthodoxy by undermining the Cosmological 
Argument, the Free Will Defence, the immateriality of the soul, and more generally the 
conception of man as radically distinct from the animal creation. Thus we see Hume’s 
explanatory naturalism, epistemic empiricism, anti-supernaturalism, and biological 
naturalism all fitting together into a coherent system.
This system is also profoundly skeptical by the standards of Hume’s day, most nota -
bly in regard to its irreligion and denial of the possibility of a priori insight into the 
nature of things. But Hume does not intend it to be corrosively  skeptical, in the sense 
of posing a direct threat to the possibility of a philosophically respectable human sci -
ence. Thus the extreme skepticism that arises in Treatise  Book 1 Part 4 is not central 
to his philosophical plans, but derives instead from what he takes to be the logical 
following-through of his own principles, compelling him towards conclusions with 
which he is deeply uncomfortable. On this conception of his project, therefore, the dis -
may that he expresses in the conclusion of Book 1 is genuine rather than a charade, 
revealing his intense awareness that he has no adequate answer to the corrosive prob -
lems that he has unearthed. This extreme skepticism is no part of his intention, let alone 
a central theme, and the Abstract  and Enquiry  therefore reflect his fundamental pur -
poses far more faithfully than does Book 1 of the Treatise .55 The central line of thought 
made plain in the Abstract  was in Hume’s eyes the “Chief Argument” of the Treatise  
right from the start. His achievement in the Enquiry  was to refine it further and thus to 
show how he could avoid the rocks of Pyrrhonism while steering the apparently “leaky, 
weather-beaten vessel” (T 1.4.7.1/263) of human reason safely towards the possibility of 
a fruitful, naturalistic science of man.
Abbreviations of Hume’s Works Cited
D Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion . In D. Coleman, ed. Dialogues Concerning 
Natural Religion and Other Writings . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007.
EM Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals: A Critical Edition . Edited by Tom 
L. Beauchamp. Oxford: Clarendon, 1998.
EU An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding: A Critical Edition . Edited by Tom L. 
Beauchamp. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2000.
LET The Letters of David Hume , 2 Vols. Edited by J.  Y . T.  Greig. Oxford:  Clarendon 
Press, 1932.
LG A Letter from a Gentleman to His friend in Edinburgh . Edited by E. C. Mossner and J. V . 
Price. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1967.
NHR The Natural History of Religion . In Tom L. Beauchamp, ed. A Dissertation on the 
Passions; The Natural History of Religion . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2007.
T A Treatise of Human Nature: A Critical Edition . Edited by D. F. Norton and M. J. Norton. 
Oxford: Clarendon, 2007.
TA An Abstract of a Treatise of Human Nature . Reprinted in  T.102   Peter Millican
Notes
 1. As understood by many hostile critics from Beattie (1770) to Stove (1973), and at least some 
admirers (e.g., Popkin 1951; Fogelin 1985).
 2. A tradition of interpretation begun by Reid (1764) and promoted by Green (1874).
 3. Morris (2009), for example, argues that “it is [Hume’s] use of [the Copy Principle’s] reverse 
in his account of definition that is really the most distinctive and innovative element of his 
system. ”
 4. Garrett (1997) interprets Hume’s central arguments as contributions to cognitive science.
 5. The Dissertation on the Passions  retains a fair amount of associationism, while the basic 
principle of custom —which Hume sees as analogous  to the association of ideas (EU 
5.20/53–4)—figures strongly in the first Enquiry . There is some suggestion in the Enquiry  
(EU 5.9/47) that Hume may have lost confidence in more specific associationist claims, but 
it seems likely that he continued to think that associationist mechanisms play a major role 
in human cognition.
 6. Three parts of the Treatise  end with sections on “the reason of animals” (T 1.3.16), “the 
pride and humility of animals” (T 2.1.12), and “the love and hatred of animals” (T 2.2.12), 
all of which stress human parallels. Hume ends Part 2.3 without a section on “the will 
and direct passions” of animals only because, he says, the parallel there is too obvious to 
require discussion (T 2.3.9.32/448). He also devotes Section 9 of the first Enquiry  to “the 
reason of animals. ”
 7. The term evolutionary naturalism  is tempting, but would be anachronistic as applied 
to Hume. Darwin’s theory of evolution did not appear until 1859, although his note -
books of around 1839 show that he was reading Hume’s Enquiry  section on the reason of 
animals—published more than ninety years earlier—at the time that he came up with his 
theory.
 8. Hume uses this phrase many times in the Natural History of Religion  (NHR Intro.1, 2.2, 2.5, 
3.4, 4.1, 5.2, 8.2, 15.5); at EU 7.21/69 he talks of “some invisible intelligent principle. ”
 9. See for example Stroud (1977), pp. 186, 251 n. 9, 263 n. 10; Craig (1987) p. 71; Noonan (1999), 
pp. 18–19; Blackburn (2008), p. 108 n. 15. Quite apart from other objections, it is chrono -
logically very implausible that Hume left for France in 1734 with his moral ideas signifi -
cantly worked out, composed the bulk of the Treatise  there within three years, and then on 
his return delayed publishing Book 3 until twenty-one months after the others.
 10. Note that the famous hyperbolic statement about reason’s being “the slave of the passions” 
(T 2.3.3.4/415), which so inspired Kemp Smith, does not really involve any subordination  
of reason to passion, for as Hume has just explained in the same paragraph, the two are not 
(and cannot be) in conflict. His theory of action is essentially that passion sets the ends  of 
our action whereas reason works out the means . Without some desire to motivate us, we 
would not prefer one outcome over another, and hence reason would be inert because it 
has nothing to aim for, not because it is dominated .
 11. Hume took the mind-spreading metaphor from Malebranche (1674–5/1997, p. 58), but its 
vividness and apparent fit with various aspects of Hume’s own philosophy has contrib -
uted to a widespread enthusiasm for characterizing him as a projectivist , especially among 
those attracted to Kemp Smith’s view of him as privileging our sentiments in understand -
ing the world. The point made here should at least give pause to those inclined to speak 
of “Humean projection, ” for it is far from clear that his attitude to causation—where 
he clearly presents such projection as an error —is to be assimilated with his attitude to Hume’s Chief Argument   103
morality, where he talks apparently approvingly of the mind’s “gilding or staining all natu -
ral objects with the colours, borrowed from internal sentiment” (EM App. 1.21/294). The 
complications involved in ascribing projection to Hume are explored by Kail (2007).
 12. As documented at length in Russell (2008).
 13. Craig’s case for seeing the Similarity Thesis as the “dominant philosophy” of the Early 
Modern period (1987,  chapter 1) also seems to me extremely thin. Given that God is under -
stood as an infinite mind, theist philosophers will almost inevitably draw comparisons 
with the human mind, but unless these are frequent and pervasive (which Craig’s limited 
citations suggest not), they provide negligible evidence of a “dominant philosophy. ”
 14. Craig’s presentation of indirect evidence (1987: 75–128) is fifteen times longer than his 
direct evidence (1987: 71–74), which cites only T 3.1.1.4/456–7 and various passages from 
the Dialogues  (on the Design Argument).
 15. See Millican (1995) pp. 123–124, 127–129, 136; (2002) pp. 155–156, 161–163; Garrett (1997) pp. 
85–88. Since these appeared, support for the “deductivist” and “antideductivist” interpre -
tations of Hume’s argument seems to have vanished.
 16. See, for example, Millican (2009) §5 (especially pp. 671–674) on the idea of necessary con -
nexion and §4 on the two definitions, and also Section III of the current paper.
 17. The “common Opinion” here seems most likely to mean theism in general, rather than 
anything more specific.
 18. Compare Locke’s Essay  IV x 10 with Clarke (1732: 53).
 19. The more general connection between Hume’s causal topics and irreligion—to be dis -
cussed later—is also strongly corroborated by the references made to Treatise  Book 1 
in the “Sum of the Charge”: seven are to T 1.4.5, five to T 1.3.14, one each to T 1.3.2, 1.3.7, 
1.3.15, and 1.4.1, and one to the entirety of 1.4.7 (in relation to the first charge of “Universal 
Scepticism”). T 1.4.5 was clearly far more significant in context than it seems to most 
commentators today.
 20. Kames refers explicitly to the Clarke-Collins debate in his Essays  (1751: 171). Kames’s own 
debate with Baxter concerned the causation of motion, his views on which were later pub -
lished in the Essays and Observations  of 1754.
 21. For a useful summary account of this affair, see Russell (2008: 42–45), who speculates (p. 
45) that it might have played some role in encouraging Hume to leave Scotland two years 
later. The free-thinking nephew of a Chirnside minister could certainly expect unwelcome 
attention and intrusion in such an inquisitorial context.
 22. For more on this, see Millican (2007a: §§4–6).
 23. The forty philosophical memoranda are in Mossner (1948: 500–503), and, for their dating, 
see Stewart (2000), especially p. 280, and Stewart (2005: 47). Memorandum 23, quoted 
here, is one of six that concern the Free Will Defence to the Problem of Evil (the others 
being numbers 19, 24, 25, 26, and 32).
 24. See EU 2.9/21–22 and EU 7.4/62. In a letter to Hugh Blair of July 4, 1762, Hume defends 
himself against Thomas Reid’s suggestion that “I had been hasty, & not supported by any 
Colour of Argument when I affirm, that all our Ideas are copy’ d from impressions” by 
responding that “I have endeavourd to build that Principle on two Arguments, ” namely 
those from EU 2.6/19–20 and EU 2.7/20 (Brookes 1997: 257).
 25. For a defence of these arguments, however, see Garrett (1997: 41–48).
 26. Writing to Michael Ramsay on August 26, 1737, Hume recommends Bayle’s article on Zeno 
of Elea as one of the readings that will help his friend to “easily comprehend the meta -
physical Parts” of the Treatise  (Mossner 1980: 627). Hume remained proud of his treatment 104   Peter Millican
of space and time until at least 1755, when a noted mathematician, Lord Philip Stanhope, 
dissuaded him from publishing his treatise “on the metaphisical Principles of Geometry” 
(LET ii 253).
 27. For discussion of Hume’s assumption that the idea in question is simple , and of his insis -
tence that all the various causal terms in his list are “nearly synonimous, ” see Millican 
(2007b) §2.2.
 28. For further details of the debate, including relevant quotations, see Millican (2010) §II.
 29. For the overwhelming evidence that Hume saw causation (and the universe) as determin -
istic, see Millican (2010).
 30. The last and most dangerous of these implications—although perfectly clear in Hume’s 
early memoranda—was prudently omitted from the Treatise . It saw the light of publi -
cation only in the Enquiry , but even there is expressed as a “mystery” rather than as an 
explicit threat to theism (EU 8.36/103).
 31. For much more on this, see Millican (2009) and (2011). It is revealing how little of the 
New Hume literature makes any mention whatever of Clarke, Collins, moral and physical 
necessity, or the application of Hume’s definitions to the problems of thinking matter and 
of “liberty and necessity. ” These issues are now sufficiently prominent in the literature that 
readers can draw their own conclusion from New Humean discussions that strategically 
ignore them.
 32. Hence Hume’s insistence that all of Locke’s “natural” and “instituted” relations ( Essay  II 
xxviii 2 and 3) should be classed as instances of causation (T 1.1.4.3/11–2 and T 1.1.4.5/12 
respectively). Comparison of the two accounts clearly reveals the taxonomic motive here, 
thus undercutting Kemp Smith’s influential claim (1941: 245; cf. Noonan 1999: 18) that 
Hume’s citing of blood and duty relationships as examples of causation is indicative of a 
predominant interest in moral philosophy. For detailed assessment of Hume’s theory of 
relations, see Millican (forthcoming) §2.
 33. So much so that the title word “probability” does not even appear in the main text until  
T 1.3.6.4/89.
 34. This footnote was an afterthought, inserted into the Treatise  while it was going through the 
press by means of a “cancel” leaf, which I believe accounts for its placement at the end of the 
section: it really belongs at the end of T 1.3.9.4/108 and should be read as a comment on T 
1.3.9.3–4/107–8. Hume presents it as revealing an ambiguity in “the imagination, ” although 
more precisely he is drawing a distinction between two types of principle  that operate on 
our ideas in the imagination: those that deserve the accolade of “reason” and those that 
do not. The same distinction is made more prominently at T 1.4.4.1–2/225–6, between the 
“permanent, irresistible, and universal” principles and those that are “changeable, weak, 
and irregular. ” Allusions to the distinction are also evident at T 1.3.13.11–12/149–50 and 
especially T 1.4.7.6–7/267–8, where its undermining seems to put Hume’s entire philo -
sophical project at risk, as we shall see in Section V of the current paper.
 35. Compare Locke’s suggestion that “Reason … perceives the probable connexion of all the 
Ideas  or Proofs one to another” in a discourse that involves probable inference ( Essay  IV 
xvii 2).
 36. If he refuses to acknowledge anything , of course, then he can present no reason either way.
 37. See §1 of Millican (2012) for a detailed discussion of this response to extreme skepticism, 
which is more substantial than a crude appeal to justificatory naturalism : Hume is not 
merely  saying that we cannot help reasoning inductively.Hume’s Chief Argument   105
 38. Later, at T 1.4.7.3/265 and T 1.4.7.5/266–7, Hume does show concern about the skepti -
cal impact of his conclusions that induction relies on the mind’s enlivening of ideas and 
that the impression of necessity is subjective. But until Part 4, the word “scepticism” and 
its cognates do not appear at all in the Treatise , except for a disapproving comment at  
T Intro.3/xiv.
 39. It is puzzling—and perhaps a symptom of Hume’s order of composition and haste in 
publication—that his most explicit presentation of the distinction, which moreover pres -
ents it as unambiguously required in order to “justify” his position, comes after  two sec -
tions (T 1.4.1 and 1.4.2) that cast serious doubt on its tenability.
 40. The key causal principle, “from like effects we presume like causes, ” is applied at  
T 1.4.4.4/227.
 41. Indeed the supposed eternity  of salvation or hellfire invites Pascal’s famous Wager: better 
to “bet” on religion if the stakes are so high (and ignore the theoretical objections to the 
Wager as “cold, and strain’ d”—T 1.4.7.9/269).
 42. I am unconvinced by Garrett’s appeal (1997, pp. 233–237) to what he calls Hume’s “Title 
Principle” (at T 1.4.7.11/270) as a solution to this problem. It has no clear basis, gives no 
solid criterion for discrimination, and seems to be a stage in Hume’s train of thought rather 
than a principle to which he gives enduring weight (e.g., it is not repeated in the Enquiry ).
 43. Hume might also have been motivated to seek out and present skeptical arguments 
because of their irreligious consequences (a case made strongly by Russell 2008), some -
times perhaps to the detriment of his scientific ambitions.
 44. The full title is An Abstract of a Book lately Published, entituled, A  Treatise of Human 
Nature, &c. wherein the Chief Argument of that Book is farther illustrated and explained .
 45. Note again that Hume considers our inductive beliefs to be subject to rational discipline: 
as pointed out in Section V and note 37 above, his wholehearted support of induction is 
not simply an appeal to what we naturally believe.
 46. The claim of continual diminution seems unjustified: if I mistake the reliability of my own 
mathematical judgment, for example, that error might require adjustment upward  rather 
than downward, and in any case, my mathematical reliability is quite independent of my 
reliability in assessing my own faculties. Moreover such reflexive thinking, so far from 
being a rational duty, might well distract me from the mathematics and thus be ill-advised. 
On Humean principles, the optimal self-monitoring policy is only discoverable by experi -
ence, and cannot be a priori.
 47. See, for example, T 1.4.2.26–36/200–5, T 1.4.3.2–4/219–20, and T 1.4.6.5–16/253–60.
 48. As stated, for example, at T 1.4.2.31/201–2, T 1.4.3.2/219, and T 1.4.6.6/253–5.
 49. In the Dialogues , Demea asks “What is the soul of man?” and presents something like the 
Humean bundle theory, pointing out that this is radically at odds with “that perfect immu -
tability and simplicity, which all true Theists ascribe to the Deity” (D 4.2). But there is no 
suggestion here—nor in Cleathes’s response—that change and complexity are incompat -
ible with identity over time.
 50. “It is a question of fact, whether the perceptions of the senses be produced by external 
objects, resembling them” (EU 12.12/153), but as Hume then explains, we have no observa -
tional basis for an inductive argument to decide this question (cf. T 1.4.2.47/212).
 51. The atomistic Treatise  theory of space and time, closely associated with the Separability 
Principle, is reduced in the Enquiry  to a tentative “hint” at EU 12.20 n34/158 n1, which 
clearly acknowledges the motivation “to avoid … absurdities and contradictions, ”  106   Peter Millican
so that “lovers of science” will not “expose themselves to the ridicule and contempt of the 
ignorant. ”
 52. By contrast, Hume presumably considers that even a minimal and relative conception of 
objects is enough to sustain the inductive science that he himself favors.
 53. The final sentence of EU 12.16/155 was added only in the posthumous 1777 edition, perhaps 
corroborating my speculation that Hume was in two minds, composing his ambivalent 
conclusion only when his terminal illness was making clear that he would never person -
ally resolve this.
 54. To find an answer, I believe Hume would have had to reject his Copy Principle and crude 
“constant conjunction” view of inductive inference, countenancing both “inference to the 
best explanation” and postulation of entities with which we are not acquainted. It is unsur -
prising, in view of Section III above, that he did not explore this avenue.
 55. Hence, presumably, the famous 1775  “ Advertisement” in which Hume repudiated the 
Treatise as a “juvenile work” in favor of the Enquiry  (and the other pieces in Volume 2 of 
the Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects ).
Bibliography
Baxter, Andrew. (1732). Some Reflections On a late Pamphlet, called, The State of the Moral 
World Considered . Edinburgh: Hamilton.
Beattie, James. (1770). An Essay on the Nature and Immutability of Truth; in opposition to 
Sophistry and Scepticism.  Edinburgh.
Blackburn, Simon. (2008). How to Read Hume . London: Granta Books.
Boswell, James. (1931). “ An Account of My Last Interview with David Hume, Esq., ” in 
Private Papers of James Boswell from Malahide Castle, volume 12 , prepared for the press by 
Geoffrey Scott and Frederick A. Pottle (Mount Vernon NY: William Edwin Rudge, Inc.) 
and reprinted in Norman Kemp Smith (ed.), Hume’s Dialogues concerning Natural Religion  
(London: Nelson, second edition 1947—see “D, ” Hume 1779, above), 76–89.
Boswell, James. (1932). Private Papers of James Boswell from Malahide Castle, volume 15 , pre -
pared for the press by Geoffrey Scott and Frederick A. Pottle. Mount Vernon, NY: William 
Edwin Rudge.
Brookes, Derek. (1997). “The Hume-Reid Exchange, ” in Thomas Reid (1764), An Inquiry into 
the Human Mind on the Principles of Common Sense , edited by Derek R. Brookes. Edinburgh: 
Edinburgh University Press, 255–265.
Clarke, Samuel. (1717). Remarks Upon a Book, Entituled, A Philosophical Enquiry concerning 
Human Liberty.  London.
Clarke, Samuel. (1732). A Discourse concerning the Being and Attributes of God,  8th edition, 
London.
Collins, Anthony. (1717). A Philosophical Inquiry concerning Human Liberty.  London.
Craig, Edward. (1987). The Mind of God and the Works of Man . Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Dudgeon, William. (1732). The State of the Moral World Consider’ d . Edinburgh.
Fogelin, Robert. (1985). Hume’s Skepticism in the Treatise of Human Nature.  London: Routledge 
& Kegan Paul.
Garrett, Don. (1997). Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy . New Y ork: Oxford 
University Press.
Green, T. H. (1874). “Introduction” to David Hume, A Treatise of Human Nature , edited by T. H. 
Green and T. H. Grose. London: Longman.Hume’s Chief Argument   107
Kail, Peter. (2007). Projection and Realism in Hume’s Philosophy . Oxford:  Oxford 
University Press.
Kames, Henry Home Lord. (1751). Essays on the Principles of Morality and Natural Religion . 
Edinburgh: Kincaid and Donaldson.
Kames, Henry Home Lord. (1754). “Of the Laws of Motion, ” in David Hume and Alexander 
Munro (eds), Essays and Observations, Physical and Literary.  Edinburgh: Philosophical 
Society of Edinburgh, 1–69.
Kemp Smith, Norman. (1905). “The Naturalism of Hume (I.). ” Mind  14, 149–173.
Kemp Smith, Norman. (1941). The Philosophy of David Hume . London: Macmillan.
Locke, John. (1690/1975). An Essay Concerning Human Understanding , edited by P . H. Nidditch. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press (“ Essay” ).
Malebranche, Nicolas. (1674–5/1997). The Search after Truth , trans. T. M. Lennon and P . J. 
Olscamp. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Millican, Peter. (1995). “Hume’s Argument Concerning Induction: Structure and 
Interpretation, ” in Stanley Tweyman (ed.), David Hume: Critical Assessments  (London: 
Routledge), vol. 2: 91–144; reprinted in David W . D. Owen (ed.), Hume: General Philosophy . 
Aldershot: Ashgate, 2000, 165–218.
Millican, Peter. (2002). “Hume’s Sceptical Doubts concerning Induction, ” in Peter Millican 
(ed.), Reading Hume on Human Understanding . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 107–173.
Millican, Peter. (2007a). “Introduction, ” in Oxford World’s Classics edition of Hume’s Enquiry 
concerning Human Understanding . Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Millican, Peter. (2007b). “ Against the ‘New Hume’ , ” in Rupert Read and Kenneth A. Richman 
(eds), The New Hume Debate, Revised Edition . London: Routledge, 211–252.
Millican, Peter. (2009). “Hume, Causal Realism, and Causal Science. ” Mind  118, 647–712.
Millican, Peter. (2010). “Hume’s Determinism. ” Canadian Journal of Philosophy  40, 611–642.
Millican, Peter. (2011). “Hume, Causal Realism, and Free Will, ” in Keith Allen and Tom 
Stoneham (eds), Causation and Modern Philosophy . New Y ork: Routledge, 123–165.
Millican, Peter. (2012). “Hume’s ‘Scepticism’ about Induction, ” in Alan Bailey and Dan O’Brien 
(eds), The Continuum Companion to Hume . London: Continuum, 57–103.
Millican, Peter. (forthcoming). “Hume’s Fork, and His Theory of Relations, ” in Philosophy and 
Phenomenological Research .
Morris, William Edward. (2009). “David Hume. ” The Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy  
(Spring 2013 Edition).
Mossner, Ernest Campbell. (1948). “Hume’s Early Memoranda, 1729–1440. ” Journal of the 
History of Ideas  9, 492–518.
Mossner, Ernest Campbell. (1980). The Life of David Hume , 2nd ed. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Noonan, Harold W . (1999). Hume on Knowledge.  Routledge.
Popkin, Richard. (1951). “David Hume:  His Pyrrhonism and His Critique of Pyrrhonism. ” 
Philosophical Quarterly  1, 385–407.
Reid, Thomas. (1764/1997). An Inquiry into the Human Mind on the Principles of Common 
Sense , edited by Derek R. Brookes. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
Russell, Paul. (2008). The Riddle of Hume’s Treatise:  Skepticism, Naturalism, and Irreligion . 
New Y ork: Oxford University Press.
Stewart, M. A. (1994). “ An Early Fragment on Evil, ” in M. A. Stewart and John P . Wright (eds), 
Hume and Hume’s Connexions . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 160–170.
Stewart, M. A. (2000). “The Dating of Hume’s Manuscripts, ” in Paul Wood (ed.), The Scottish 
Enlightenment: Essays in Reinterpretation . Rochester, NY: University of Rochester Press, 
267–314.108   Peter Millican
Stewart, M. A. (2005). “Hume’s Intellectual Development, ” in Marina Frasca-Spada and P . J. E. 
Kail (eds), Impressions of Hume . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 11–58.
Stove, D. C. (1973). Probability and Hume’s Inductive Scepticism . Clarendon Press.
Stroud, Barry. (1977). Hume . London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
Thornhill-Miller, Branden and Peter Millican (2015). “The Common-Core/Diversity 
Dilemma: Revisions of Humean Thought, New Empirical Research, and the Limits of 
Rational Religious Belief. ” European Journal for Philosophy of Religion 7, 1–49.