Philosophy and Phenomenological Research
Vol. XCV No. 1, July 2017
doi: 10.1111/phpr.12385
© 2017 Philosophy and Phenomenological Research, LLC
Hume ’s Fork, and his Theory of Relations1
PETER MILLICAN
Hertford College, Oxford
Hume ’s Fork—the distinction between “relations and ideas ”and“matters of fact ”intro-
duced in his ﬁrstEnquiry—is well known, though considered by most specialist scholars
to be a crude simpli ﬁcation of the far more sophisticated theory of relations in his Trea-
tise. But close analysis of the Treatise theory shows it to be an unsatisfactory reworking
of Locke ’s taxonomy, implausibly identifying relations with mental operations and deliv-
ering a confused criterion of demonstrability which Hume subsequently abandons in
favour of his Conceivability Principle. The latter then becomes the basis for Hume ’s
Fork, the theory of which, as implicitly de ﬁned by the various criteria he speci ﬁes, turns
out to be consistent and plausible. However it faces a number of potential problems,
some of which Hume might have been expected to address, while others —particularly
concerning his tendency to identify apriority, demonstrability, and necessity —derive from
relatively recent Epistemology, Philosophy of Language, and Philosophy of Mathematics.
All of these are considered, some requiring tightening of Hume ’s distinction while others
imply limitations. Finally, a conclusion is drawn emphasising the continuing value of
Hume ’s position, despite these dif ﬁculties.
Hume ’s Fork—his distinction between “relations of ideas ”and “matters of fact ”—is
justly famous, and widely acknowledged as an in ﬂuential ancestor of the familiar modern
analytic/synthetic distinction. Given Hume ’s tendency to see ideas as the determinants of
meaning, the very term “relations of ideas ”suggests something like “truth in virtue of
meaning ”. And the logical positivists, who took inspiration from Hume in formulating
this modern notion of analyticity ,2saw it also as the only legitimate source of necessity
orapriority , making Hume ’s Fork appear as a clear and elegant anticipation of this iden-
tiﬁcation of the three notions:
1For discussion of this paper, I am very grateful to Amyas Merivale, Duncan Pritchard, and Hsueh Qu.
2Quine (1943: 120) reports this notion: “It is usual to describe an analytic statement as a statement that is
true by virtue of the meanings of the words; or as a statement that follows logically from the meanings
of the words. ”Pap (1944: 471) attributes it to Schlick (translating from a German original). Ayer ’sLan-
guage, Truth and Logic of 1936, heavily in ﬂuenced by Schlick ’s Vienna Circle, gave the formulation “a
proposition is analytic when its validity depends solely on the de ﬁnitions of the symbols it contains, and
synthetic when its validity is determined by the facts of experience ”(1971: 105, cf. 21). In what follows,
we shall focus exclusively on this notion of analyticity because it is closest in spirit to Hume, but note
that Kant ( Critique of Pure Reason , Introduction §IV) instead de ﬁnes an analytic proposition as one in
which “the predicate is contained within the subject ”, and Frege ( Foundations of Arithmetic §3) as a
proposition which is either a logical truth or is reducible to a logical truth by substitution of de ﬁnitions.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 3Philosophy and
Phenomenological ResearchRelations of Ideas [are] either intuitively or demonstratively certain. Propositions of this
kind are discoverable by the mere operation of thought, without dependence on what is
any where existent in the universe ...Matters of fact, which are the second objects of
human reason, are not ascertained in the same manner ...The contrary of every matter
of fact is still possible; because it can never imply a contradiction ...We should in vain,
therefore, attempt to demonstrate its falsehood. ( E4.1–2)
As the ﬁnal sentence hints, Hume uses this distinction for the crucial purpose of delimit-
ing the range of what can be demonstrated (E4.18, 12.27 –8), or in modern terms,
proved deductively .3But this well-known passage comes from the Enquiry concerning
Human Understanding of 1748, and Hume ’s Fork is not spelled out in anything like
these terms in his Treatise of Human Nature of 1739. There, the comparable role is
played by a complex theory of “philosophical relations ”which is very different in detail.
And this raises an important interpretative question: is Hume ’s Fork, as presented in the
Enquiry ,areplacement for his Treatise theory of philosophical relations, or a simpli ﬁca-
tion? In other words, should we take Hume ’s Fork as an authoritative statement of his
mature view, leaving the theory of the Treatise behind, or should we instead look to the
Treatise for his authoritative theory, and view the Enquiry position as a later gloss, a
simpli ﬁed sketch for easy consumption?
Of those who have addressed this question, Norman Kemp Smith is the most conspicu-
ous early example, remarking in 1941 that the Enquiry distinction “is at once more general
and more satisfactory ”(1941: 355). But later scholars have combined to argue strongly in
the opposite direction, with Donald Gotterbarn (1974: 274, 279), Lewis White Beck (1978:83–4), and Marina Frasca-Spada (1998: 126 –7), for example, all taking the Treatise as
authoritative. In the same spirit, David Owen (1999: ch. 5) and Helen Beebee (2006: §2.2–
4) have provided sophisticated accounts of Humean “demonstration ”that draw heavily on
distinctive aspects of the Treatise approach to yield a concept very different from what we
understand by “deduction ”, and thus move signi ﬁcantly away from the straightforward
anticipation of modern logical categories that previous generations of philosophers have
found (perhaps too readily) in the familiar text of the Enquiry . Owen, indeed, largely
ignores the Enquiry , while Beebee fairly quickly puts it aside after suggesting “it is clear
that [Hume] still has more or less the same underlying view in the later work ”(p. 19). Don
Garrett ’s recent book (2015) evinces a similar attitude, accepting the familiar terminology
from the Enquiry but analysing and defending —on Hume ’s behalf—the theory of the
Treatise . Henry Allison expresses a more forthright preference:
“theEnquiry account, pre-
cisely because of its super ﬁcial clarity and aura of familiarity, is seriously misleading, if
taken as the de ﬁnitive expression of Hume ’s epistemology ”(2008: 64).
Part of my purpose here is to argue against this consensus, by showing that the logical
framework of the Enquiry is not only simpler than that of the Treatise , but also —as
Kemp Smith correctly judged —”more general and more satisfactory ”. This will involve a
fairly detailed analysis of Hume ’s theory of relations in the Treatise , his Dichotomy
between “constant ”and “inconstant ”relations, and the interplay between the various
3I have argued at length elsewhere —and will substantiate further in §3 below—that Hume ’s“demonstra-
tive argument ”is essentially the same as deduction , in the informal sense of an argument whose premises
absolutely guarantee the truth of its conclusion (see Millican 1995: 96 –8, 2002: §7.1, and especially
2007a: §V). Thus understood, “Pcan be demonstrated ”is broadly equivalent to “Pcan be proved deduc-
tively ”.
4PETER MILLICANcriteria that he proposes for the two halves of his Fork. This comparative analysis will
also be combined with two other aims: to clarify Hume ’s attitude to conceivability and
inconceivability as criteria for “relations of ideas ”and“matters of fact ”, and to provide
an overview of how Hume ’s Fork stands up in the light of more recent developments in
Epistemology, Philosophy of Language, and Philosophy of Mathematics.
1. Philosophical and Natural Relations
Hume introduces the topic of relations in the Treatise as part of his systematic taxonomy
of the objects of the human mind, his main discussion of them coming in Treatise 1.1.5,
“Of relations. ”4By this stage, the previous section “Of the connexion or association of
ideas ”(1.1.4) has already identi ﬁed three associative principles by which our thoughts
are naturally led from one idea to another:
The qualities, from which this association arises, and by which the mind is after this man-
ner convey ’d from one idea to another, are three, viz. R ESEMBLANCE ,CONTIGUITY in time
or place, and C AUSE and E FFECT .(T1.1.4.1)
Hume ends this discussion of the association of ideas by highlighting one of its “remark-
able”effects, in generating “those complex ideas, which are the common subjects of our
thoughts and reasoning ...These complex ideas may be divided into Relations ,Modes ,
andSubstances .”(T1.1.4.7). He accordingly moves on to relations in Treatise 1.1.5, and
modes and substances in 1.1.6.
Hume starts his treatment of relations by noting an important ambiguity, between “re-
lation ”understood in a natural ,o ra philosophical sense:
The word relation is commonly us ’d in two senses considerably different from each
other. Either for that quality, by which two ideas are connected together in the imagina-
tion, and the one naturally introduces the other, after the manner above-explained; or forthat particular circumstance, in which, even upon the arbitrary union of two ideas in the
fancy, we may think proper to compare them. In common language the former is always
the sense, in which we use the word, relation ; and ’tis only in philosophy, that we extend
it to mean any particular subject of comparison, without a connecting principle.
(T1.1.5.1)
He gives just one example here. Comparison of two things can reveal that they are very
distant from each other —this is a philosophical relation between them. But it is not a
natural relation, because distant things don ’t naturally lead the thought from one to the
other.5Contiguity, by contrast, is both a philosophical anda natural relation —it is a rela-
tionship that can hold between two objects ( T1.1.5.5), but also , this relationship is of a
type that naturally generates an association of ideas ( T1.1.4.1): if two objects are con-
tiguous, then thought of one of them will often naturally lead to thought of the other.
Hume ’s main aim in this paragraph seems to be to clarify —for the bene ﬁto fh i s
non-philosophical readers —how philosophers characteristically use the word “relation ”.
4As we shall see, other important contributions to his theory of relations are at T1.3.1.1 –5 and 1.3.2.1 –3.
5Hume introduces the term natural relation implicitly at T1.1.5.9, and explicitly at T1.3.6.16. Note that
natural relations in this associational sense are not to be confused with those that are natural in the sensethat is “oppos ’dt o artiﬁcial”(T3.2.1.19, cf. T3.1.2.9), as at T3.2.2.11.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 5According to this usage, which owed much of its currency to John Locke,6we can talk
of countless arbitrary relations as holding between AandB, even if the ordinary person
wouldn ’t for a moment think of AandBasrelated in any natural or everyday sense. As
Locke stresses, “there is no one thing, whether simple Idea, Substance, Mode, or Rela-
tion, or Name of either of them, which is not capable of almost an in ﬁnite number of
Considerations, in reference to other things ”, and something is “capable of as many Rela-
tions, as there can be occasions of comparing [it] to other things, in any manner of agree-
ment, disagreement, or respect whatsoever ”(Essay II xxv 7). Thus relations in this
philosopher ’s sense reach well beyond the bounds of ordinary relatedness. To take an
extreme example, I can de ﬁne relation Ras holding between extinct volcano Xand oyster
Yif and only if Xﬁrst erupted more than 2,000 miles from the place where Ydied, and
at least 10 million years earlier. Rthen relates, in the philosopher ’s sense, pairs of objects
that nobody would normally think of as being related at all (unless, by some surprising
coincidence, they came to be mentioned in the same story or some such).
As for the contrasting “common language ”use of the word “relation ”, Hume is
proposing that everyday relatedness can be identi ﬁed with association of ideas by means
ofresemblance ,contiguity , and causation ,“after the manner above-explained ”in the pre-
vious section. So just as the ﬁnal paragraph of that section ( T1.1.4.7, quoted earlier) pro-
vides a neat link into the discussion of relations, so the ﬁrst paragraph on relations
provides a neat link back to the discussion of association of ideas. Moreover given
Hume ’s theory that relatedness in the everyday sense is a function of the very association
that he has just described, it is easy to understand why at this point —about to embark on
a taxonomy of relations in the philosopher ’s sense—heﬁnds it appropriate to start his
new discussion by explicitly highlighting the otherwise potentially confusing contrast
between the two senses. Another obvious motivation would be to guard against ambigu-
ity in his own text, since later in the Treatise he will sometimes use the word “relation ”
in the narrow associational sense,7but mostly in the broader philosophical sense.8
We have seen that Hume ’s philosophical/natural distinction, at least as originally intro-
duced, appears to be a simple verbal clari ﬁcation. But many scholars have accorded the
distinction far more importance. Thus John Robinson (1962: 134) states that “it is in fact
utterly fundamental for a clear understanding of what Hume ’s philosophy is all about ”,
and suggests “that it is the failure to get this distinction clear which is responsible for
most of the misunderstanding and confusions which exist concerning Hume ’s treatment
of causation ”. Likewise Alan Hausman (1967: 255) attributes “some common misunder-
standings of Hume ’s views on causation ”to“confusion about the distinction ”, though his
6For example the article on Relation in Chambers ’inﬂuential Cyclopaedia of 1728 takes most of its con-
tent, either explicitly or implicitly, from Locke ’s discussion in Chapter II xxv of his Essay concerning
Human Understanding .
7When presenting his associationist theories, Hume has a tendency to con ﬁne“relation ”to those that are
natural: thus T1.3.8.3 considers “the nature of relation, and that facility of transition, which is essential
to it”, and likewise T1.4.2.34 says that “The very nature and essence of relation is to connect our ideas
with each other, and upon the appearance of one, to facilitate the transition to its correlative. ”Other clear
examples are at T2.2.5.5, 2.2.8.14, and 2.2.8.20 (while T1.3.16.9 is a rare case that seems genuinely
ambiguous).
8Even in contexts involving association, Hume repeatedly refers to resemblance, contiguity and causationas three amongst a wider set of relations (e.g. T1.1.4.4, 1.2.5.21, 1.3.6.13, 1.3.9.2, 1.4.6.16, 2.1.12.7),
and to “relations ”in a way clearly intended to embrace all of his philosophical relations (e.g. T1.3.2.1 –
3, 3.1.1.18-27, cf. also T1.4.2.2 –7).
6PETER MILLICANaccount is “markedly ”different from Robinson ’s (p. 255, n. 2). More recently, Helen
Beebee (2006: 99 –107; 2011) and Eric Schliesser (2007: 90 –5) also appeal to the distinc-
tion—albeit again in very different ways —as key to understanding Hume ’s two de ﬁni-
tions of cause. How is it that a distinction which is supposedly so crucial to Hume ’s
position on such a central aspect of his philosophy can be interpreted so variously, both
in signi ﬁcance and content?
The reason for such huge variation in the interpretation and assessment of the philo-
sophical/natural distinction seems to be the paucity of textual evidence, combined with
the potential importance of the few places where it is mentioned. Apart from T1.1.5.1,
where it is introduced, and T1.1.5.9—which merely remarks that “the relation of cause
and effect is a ...philosophical relation, as well as a natural one ”—the distinction is
entirely absent from the text of the Treatise (as likewise from the rest of Hume ’s works)
except for two sentences, the ﬁrst of which is a paragraph in itself:9
(A) Thus tho ’causation be a philosophical relation, as implying contiguity, succession, and
constant conjunction, yet ’tis only so far as it is a natural relation, and produces an union
among our ideas, that we are able to reason upon it, or draw any inference from it.
(T1.3.6.16)
(B) There may two de ﬁnitions be given of [cause and effect], which are only different, by
their presenting a different view of the same object, and making us consider it either as a
philosophical or as a natural relation; either as a comparison of two ideas, or as an asso-
ciation betwixt them. ( T1.3.14.31)
Much has been read into these passages, the ﬁrst of which ends the section on induction,
while the second introduces Hume ’s two “deﬁnitions of cause ”at the culmination of his
extended discussion of the relation of causation (which structures so much of this part of
theTreatise ). It is not surprising that such prominent passages should be suspected of
being highly signi ﬁcant in Hume ’s philosophy.
Nor, perhaps, is it surprising that with so little textual evidence to go on, the interpre-
tative options have ranged widely. Schliesser ambitiously takes passage (A) to be pro-
nouncing a fundamental methodological maxim which is certainly not explicit either here
or in the surrounding text: “Only reasoning with the natural relation [of causation] will
produce belief ...So, theories that presuppose ...‘unnatural ’philosophical relations of
causation ”such as Newtonian forces “may be very useful as predictive devices ...but
they cannot be belief engendering ”(Schliesser 2007: 93). Other readings more modestly
look to the two passages to illuminate at least the philosophical/natural distinction itself.
Thus Hausman —in a discussion that draws on (A) —argues that “Philosophical relations
...connect ordinary objects; natural relations connect our thoughts about them. The two
categories are radically distinct. The ﬁrst is ontological, the second, psychological. ”
(1967: 255, and see pp. 266 –7). Beebee sees passage (B) as likewise implying a distinc-
tion of disjoint categories, though “not between two different kinds of relation ”but
between “two different mental procedures by which causal judgments come to be made
9This is not to deny that Hume uses the term “relation ”in the two different senses, as already remarked,
and he occasionally ( T1.1.5.2 –3, 1.3.1.1 –2) refers to “philosophical relations ”to clarify that usage. But
the only passages beyond T1.1.5 to suggest an explicit contrast between the two sides of the distinction
areT1.3.6.16 and 1.3.14.31.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 7—namely, the comparison ( ﬁrst de ﬁnition) and association (second de ﬁnition) of ideas ”
(2011: 244). As more is read into the distinction, so in turn the greater potential this
yields for interpreting these two passages as having fundamental signi ﬁcance for Hume ’s
views more generally. And thus the interpretative bandwagon goes on, feeding on itself
for want of substantial textual nourishment.
In opposition to all such readings, I believe that the philosophical/natural distinction
is exactly what Hume presents it as being, namely, a generally harmless ambiguity in
the understanding of the word “relation ”, one sense of which is more comprehensive
than the other (since all relations whatever are “philosophical ”). Hausman ’s claim that
their relata are distinct —respectively objects and ideas —may seem marginally sup-
ported by passage (A), but Hume ’s main treatment of the topic seems clearly to imply
that the very same relation can be both a philosophical and a natural relation, which
counts against such distinctness. Resemblance is a philosophical relation which some-
times (but not always) “produces a connexion or association of ideas ”(T1.1.5.3);10
even more explicitly, the “relation of cause and effect is a ...philosophical relation, as
well as a natural one ”(T1.1.5.9). When itemising the various categories of philosophi-
cal relation at T1.1.5.3 –9, Hume mostly refers to their holding between objects, but
contrariety (T1.1.5.6) is explained instead in terms of ideas. And in his initial state-
ment of the distinction itself (quoted earlier from T1.1.5.1), both sides are explained
in terms of ideas. Hausman also seems to ignore passages in which Hume explicitly
states that large classes of relations “must be common both to objects and impressions ”
(T1.4.5.21) or common to objects and ideas ( T1.2.2.1). In general, Hume seems
happy to talk indifferently of relations as holding between objects or between our ideas
of them,11and there is no ground here for seeing the natural relations as anything
more than a sub-category of the philosophical relations, consisting of those speci ﬁc
relations that correspond to associative tendencies of the human mind. Of course conti-
guity , say, between Aand Bcan lead our thought from AtoBonly if we are aware
of that contiguity: to this extent, it is obvious that a natural relation will involve ideas
rather than just objects. But it is equally true that A’s being greater than B (a philo-
sophical relation involving “proportion of quantity or number ”) will lead us to conclude
that Bisless than A only if we are aware of that inequality. In neither case does this
obvious epistemological point do anything to show that the relation in question cannot
hold between the objects of which we think (or, indeed, between objects of which we
have never thought).12
10T1.1.5.1 and 1.1.5.3 (which is quoted near the beginning of §2 below) together seem to imply that
whether some speci ﬁcresemblance counts as a natural relation or not can depend on the relevant statis-
tics: hence a natural relation is simply a philosophical relation that is suf ﬁciently salient to correspond to
an associative tendency of the human mind.
11Terminological rigour is not Hume ’s greatest strength, and in the Treatise he talks in quick succession of
a relation as a complex idea (T1.1.4.7), a quality ,a circumstance , and a subject of comparison
(T1.1.5.1). Later he refers to the relation of causation as an object ,acomparison of two ideas , and an
association betwixt two ideas (T1.3.14.31). This should warn us against building interpretative castles on
such textual snippets (especially when they involve the word “object ”, which Hume often uses as at
T1.3.14.31 to mean something like an object of thought —whatever we might be thinking about —rather
than anything more speci ﬁc). In the Enquiry Hume is less terminologically promiscuous, perhaps recog-
nising that a relation, to borrow a phrase, “is what it is, and not another thing ”(Butler 1729: 25, §33).
12Locke also was happy to admit relations as holding across all categories of things —see the quotation
from Essay II xxv 7 near the beginning of §1 above.
8PETER MILLICANBeebee ’s claim that the philosophical/natural distinction re ﬂects the mental differ-
ence between comparison and association has more initial plausibility, in that any
relation ’s being natural is clearly a matter of its matching with human associational
psychology, while Hume repeatedly mentions comparison in connection with philo-
sophical relations (especially in T1.1.5). Occasionally, indeed, he even goes so far as
to suggest that a relation ’s holding depends upon some prior mental operation of
comparison:
...let us consider, that since equality is a relation, it is not, strictly speaking, a property
in the ﬁgures themselves, but arises merely from the comparison, which the mind makes
between them. ( T1.2.4.21)
Mostly, however, he is very ready to treat objects ’relations as quite independent of our
minds, and indeed to explain our mental operations as causally in ﬂuenced by those objec-
tive relations. In contrast to the passage just quoted, we are told elsewhere that instancesof the very relation in question —mathematical equality —arediscovered rather than men-
tally created:
’Tis from the idea of a triangle, that we discover the relation of equality, which its three
angles bear to two right ones; and this relation is invariable, as long as our idea remains
the same. ( T1.3.1.1)
Relations between physical objects and events are similarly objective:
As to what may be said, that the operations of nature are independent of our thought and
reasoning, I allow it; and accordingly have observed, that objects bear to each other the
relations of contiguity and succession; that like objects may be observ ’d in several
instances to have like relations; and that all this is independent of, and antecedent to the
operations of the understanding. ( T1.3.14.28)
Wherever we have no successive perceptions, we have no notion of time, even tho ’there
be a real succession in the objects. ( T1.2.3.7)
Moreover Hume ’s occasional suggestion that relation itself depends upon comparison
seems to be simply an expression of his nominalism rather than anything very speci ﬁ-
cally to do with relations, and is of a piece with his statement at T1.1.4.7 (as quoted
above in the ﬁrst paragraph of this section) that relations ,modes andsubstances are all
“complex ideas ”.13The supposed link between relation and comparison is not a novel
Humean doctrine but straightforwardly inherited from Locke, who likewise treats rela-
tions in the context of itemising our ideas within a nominalist agenda:
Relation is a way of comparing, or considering two things together; and giving one, or
both of them, some appellation from that Comparison, and sometimes giving even the
13In the section following “Of relations ”, ideas of modes and substances are accordingly described in de ﬂa-
tionary terms as “nothing but a collection of simple ideas, that are united by the imagination, and have a
particular name assign ’d them ...”(T1.1.6.2). Two paragraphs later, at T1.1.7.1, Hume begins his treat-
ment of abstract ideas, whose nominalistic aim —following Berkeley —is to explain our use of general
terms without recourse to general ideas.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 9Relation it self a Name. ...Relation [is] not contained in the real existence of Things.
(Essay II xxv 7 –8)
So Hume ’s statement that “relation ...arises merely from ...comparison ”appears to be
a standard nominalist slogan rather than a carefully thought-out position.14And it disap-
pears without trace after the Treatise (as in M App. 1.11–13, where he talks about dis-
covering or inferring new or unknown relations, cf. T3.1.1.18 –27). When discussing
actual relations —as opposed to abstractly considering their metaphysical status —Hume
consistently treats them as objective. Their real link with comparison is simply that this
provides the source of our ideas of them. Distance, for example, is “a true relation,
because we acquire an idea of it by the comparing of objects ”(T1.1.5.1); but he never
suggests that objective distance itself is dependent on mental comparison.15
The super ﬁcial textual link between philosophical relations and comparison thus pro-
vides only a very weak basis for Beebee ’s account of the philosophical/natural distinc-
tion. But her main argument in its favour is independent of all this (2011: 252, 254),resting on the claim that it can make good sense of Hume ’s passage (B) which states that
his two de ﬁnitions present causation “either as a philosophical or as a natural relation;
either as a comparison of two ideas, or as an association betwixt them ”(T1.3.14.31).
Accordingly, Beebee offers a “Procedural Interpretation ”of the de ﬁnitions which takes
them to “reﬂect two different mental procedures by which causal judgments come to be
made—namely, the comparison ( ﬁrst de ﬁnition) and association (second de ﬁnition) of
ideas ”(2011: 244; cf. 2006: 17, 102 –3; 2007: 418-19). Since, however, Hume never
explicitly suggests that his de ﬁnitions concern the making of causal judgements , any sup-
port for Beebee ’s interpretation here is purely conjectural, or at best derives from the lack
of satisfactory alternatives. As she herself says,
The Procedural Interpretation gets its main support ...from the fact that other interpreta-
tions fail so badly in making sense of Hume ’s claim to be characterizing causation sepa-
rately as a natural and a philosophical relation. (Beebee 2011: 254)
She also acknowledges that her interpretation faces dif ﬁculty with the other key passage
(A) from T1.3.6.16, which seems to imply that we cannot “reason upon ...or draw any
inference from ”causation as a philosophical relation. For this obviously con ﬂicts with
Beebee ’s understanding of the ﬁrst de ﬁnition as re ﬂecting “a mental procedure by which
causal judgments come to be made ”, given that coming to such a judgement through a
mental procedure that respects the conditions enshrined in Hume ’sﬁrst de ﬁnition looks
rather like a paradigm case of reasoning andinference .
Instead of drawing back from this tension within her interpretation, Beebee appeals to
other texts to back up her claim “that Hume is clearly and explicitly committed to the
claim that causation considered as a philosophical relation isa route to causal judgment ”
14The entry on “relation ”in Chambers ’Cyclopaedia (1738) states early on that “relation , take it as you
will, is only the mind; and has nothing to do with the things themselves ”.
15Note also that at T1.1.5.5 Hume itemises “contiguous ”as another of the spatio-temporal relations whose
ideas arise from comparison, notwithstanding that contiguity is a natural relation. Hume will later argue
—in the famous Section 1.3.14 on the idea of necessary connexion —that the most crucial element of the
idea of causation arises in a different manner. But this is a special case, and evidently does not followsimply from causation ’s being a natural relation.
10 PETER MILLICAN(2011: 259).16She thus challenges the authority of the straightforward reading of passage
(A), taking this not as prohibiting reasoning based on the ﬁrst de ﬁnition, but merely as
insisting that natural inference comes ﬁrst:
The basic idea is just this: once we have the idea of causation (an idea that requires that
we have the habit of association that generates the needed impression-source for the idea
of necessary connection), we are perfectly capable of deploying it in cases where the
associative mechanism does not operate ...just as we can for any other idea. (Beebee
2011: 261)
I am very sympathetic to this sort of approach to the two de ﬁnitions, having long recom-
mended it myself.17But note that it requires the second de ﬁnition to be understood in a
genetic or historical manner, as encapsulating the circumstances in which the impression of
necessary connexion arises . And this seems to be ﬂatly inconsistent with Beebee ’s Procedu-
ral Interpretation, which understands both de ﬁnitions as encapsulating ongoing ways of
making causal judgements . Beebee does not address this problem, but it looks fatal to her
attempt to render her interpretation consistent with passage (A). That being so, her overall
case for the interpretation seems very weak: there are no clear texts to support its centralclaims, and its only distinctive support comes from its alleged ability to make sense of pas-
sage (B), but this comes at the cost of making nonsense of passage (A).
We have so far seen no signi ﬁcant objection to our initial understanding of Hume ’s
philosophical/natural distinction as a straightforward matter of verbal clari ﬁcation. But by
now it might well be wondered whether this simple account can do any better than Beebee
in explaining the two key passages (A) and (B), which have seemed to endow the distinc-
tion with such potential signi ﬁcance. It is unrealistic to expect to build de ﬁnitive judge-
ments on such scanty textual evidence, but a plausible account can easily be given. First,
then, it is clear that Hume was struck by the contrast between the “philosophical ”reason-
ing standardly considered to be characteristic of rational man, and his own “natural ”
account of inductive inference based on instinctive association. His argument of Treatise
1.3.6 had shown that without the crucial input from this inductive instinct —and relying
purely on philosophical reason “comparing ”ideas—we would have remained forever
unable to make any inference to the unobserved.
18He had also developed a theory (cf.
16These other texts are from the sections on “Rules by which to judge of causes and effects ”(T1.3.15)
and “Liberty and necessity ”(T2.3.1). Such texts tell strongly against an interpretation such as Sch-
liesser ’s that accords great weight to passage (A) in this respect, especially when supplemented by pas-
sages from the Enquiry where Hume appears to support scienti ﬁc inference based on a Newtonian
understanding of forces (e.g. E1.15, 7.25 n. 16, 7.29 n. 17), thus spreading the legitimate scope of cau-
sal inference even further from “natural ”custom.
17“The second de ﬁnition ...satisﬁes the demands of the Copy Principle, and shows how the distinctive
conceptual content that characterizes causal judgements (i.e. the element of connexion or consequential-
ity) is derived. Once we have acquired that concept, however, we are free to apply it in a far more disci-plined way than our natural instinctive reactions alone could achieve ...[through appeal to Hume ’sﬁrst
deﬁnition, the rules that expand on it, systematization of probability judgements, and the search for hid-
den causes etc.] ...Nothing in [Hume ’s] theory of meaning demands that an idea —once acquired —
should continue to be con ﬁned to the circumstances that originally produced it. His second de ﬁnition, in
short, re ﬂects his genetic perspective on meaning, and makes no claim to be analytic . Hence there is no
requirement that it should be co –extensive with the ﬁrst de ﬁnition. ”(Millican 2009: 665 –6).
18Like Beebee I am happy to see this as a genetic point about the origin of causal inference and of the idea
of necessary connexion, but without any inconsistency, because this genetic reading conforms exactly tomy interpretation of Hume ’s second de ﬁnition of cause.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 11T1.3.2.1 –3, quoted near the end of §3 below) which identi ﬁed the operation of such infer-
ence speci ﬁcally with causation, uniquely amongst the (philosophical) relations. Hence he
concluded his discussion of induction with the observation (A) that “tho’causation be a
philosophical relation ...,y e t ’tis only so far as it is a natural relation, and produces an
union among our ideas, that we are able to reason upon it, or draw any inference from it ”.
This observation seems to be reasonably appropriate given the background and upshot of
his argument, requiring no special further interpretation (and therefore sanctioning none).
The case of passage (B) from T1.3.14.31 is more tricky, the text seeming to imply that
the philosophical/natural distinction is doing signi ﬁcant theoretical work and generating a
need for two de ﬁnitions where only one might have been expected. Here, I speculate that
Hume independently found that he needed two de ﬁnitions (for a quite different reason,
explained below), and then was struck by their apparent correspondence with the philo-
sophical/natural distinction, in that the ﬁrst de ﬁnition speci ﬁes objective conditions of the
sort that one might philosophically contemplate and “compare ”, while the second empha-
sises the “natural ”associative contribution of the inferentially engaged mind. Having
noticed this parallel, Hume might well have felt an understandable temptation to cite it as
justiﬁcation for his (otherwise puzzling) provision of two de ﬁnitions.19
All this adds up to a very de ﬂationary account of the philosophical/natural distinction
and its signi ﬁcance, so I shall conclude by showing why such an account is well moti-
vated not only textually but also philosophically, in that no matter how we may interpret
the nuances of the distinction, the two famous passages that allude to it are philosophi-cally insubstantial, even on Hume ’s own theory. Thus (A), though super ﬁcially quite
plausible, actually mislocates the crucial factor that makes inductive inference possible,
which is not causation ’s role as merely one of the three natural associative relations
(alongside resemblance and contiguity), but rather, the operation of custom—causal infer-
ence from a present impression —which is uniquely able to channel the force and vivacity
of that impression to generate belief. Mere association of ideas —my thoughts drifting
from object Pto the resembling Q, to its cause R, to the contiguous S—is quite inade-
quate to generate belief , which as Hume repeatedly emphasises —even in the immediately
preceding sentence at T1.3.6.15—requires the operation of custom starting from a pre-
sent impression (cf. T1.3.7.6, 1.3.8.10). Moreover the natural relations of resemblance
andcontiguity , even if acting on a present impression, are unable to generate suf ﬁcient
vivacity for belief, so “reasoning upon ”a natural relation isn ’t by itself enough to support
factual inference.
20Nor, indeed, is the relation of causation —even acting on a present
impression —sufﬁcient for belief, if it is merely acting associationally (e.g. I see a paint-
ing of Salisbury Cathedral by John Constable and think of him as related to it causally,
just as I might think of the cathedral itself as related to it through resemblance). Such
association presupposes belief in the causal relationship, whereas the generation of belief
requires the operation of custom : inference to the unobserved based on a present impres-
sion and an observed constant conjunction. Custom is indeed analogous to the
19Another factor plausibly relevant to both passages (A) and (B) is Hume ’s evident concern in the Treatise
to present a systematic theoretical structure. They might well have appealed to him as explicitly linkingthe initial theory of relations, from which his epistemology builds, with two of the major conclusions of
that epistemology.
20Hume attempts to explain this contrast within his three natural relations at T1.3.9.2 –7, without clearly
focusing on the distinction between causation as a mere associative relation, and custom starting from a
present impression.
12 PETER MILLICANassociation of ideas, close enough perhaps to be described as “a principle of association ”
(T1.3.7.6), but it is notthe same as causation ’s merely being a “natural ”relation, a dif-
ference about which Hume seems rather vague in the Treatise , but eventually recognised
clearly at E5.18–20.21
Perhaps surprisingly, the second de ﬁnition of cause at T1.3.14.31 —which purports to
deﬁne causation “as a natural relation ”—suggests an implicit recognition of precisely this
point:
ACAUSE is an object precedent and contiguous to another, and so united with it, that the
idea of the one determines the mind to form the idea of the other, and the impression ofthe one to form a more lively idea of the other.
This gives separate clauses covering causal association (where an idea leads to an associated
idea) and custom (where an impression leads to a belief). But the paragraph as a whole nev-
ertheless evinces confusion over the relevance of the philosophical/natural distinction,because it is notcausation ’s being a natural (as well as philosophical) relation which
requires the two de ﬁnitions. If it were, one would expect the other two natural relations —re-
semblance andcontiguity —also to require two de ﬁnitions, but Hume gives no hint of this,
nor indeed is it easy to see how there could be room for paired de ﬁnitions in these cases.
(One could try providing, say, one “deﬁnition ”ofrealcontiguity and another of perceived
contiguity, but separate de ﬁnitions of the two are no more required here than for any of the
other spatio-temporal relations in Hume ’s list at T1.1.5.5: “distant ,contiguous ,above ,be-
low,before ,after, &c. ”). What actually leads Hume to sense a need for two de ﬁnitions,
judging from his preceding discussion, is his identi ﬁcation of the impression that generates
our idea of necessary connexion , the key component of our idea of cause. This then opens
up a gap between the characteristic circumstances in which that impression arises in an
observer (as captured by the second de ﬁnition) and an abstract, observer-free, idealisation
of those circumstances (the ﬁrst de ﬁnition), yielding conditions under which we can judge
something to be a cause quite independently of that impression.
22This neatly explains why
Hume sees a parallel need for two de ﬁnitions in the case of moral virtue , where again we
have a distinctive impression (namely a pleasing sentiment of approbation —M App . 1.10)
whose circumstances of occurrence can be abstracted and generalised (namely to mental
qualities, useful or agreeable to the person himself or to others —M9.1), thus again yield-
ing a second “deﬁnition ”(M9.12) which enables the resulting idea to be applied systemati-
cally to cases where the impression does not occur.23So when composing T1.3.14.31,
Hume was misidentifying the reason why necessary connexion (and hence causation) war-
rants two de ﬁnitions, misled by a contextual coincidence, that causation is both a philosoph-
ical and a natural relation.
21AtT1.3.8.6, Hume gives an example of association of ideas involving causation but not custom, in the
case of holy relics. But then he rather smudges the distinction by concluding “This phaenomenon clearly
proves, that a present impression with a relation of causation may enliven any idea, and consequently
produce belief or assent ”. The parallel passage at E5.18 avoids any mention of generating belief, as does
E5.19, while E5.20 points out explicitly that “in these phaenomena, the belief of the correlative object
is always presupposed ”. The Enquiry , indeed, seems to be clear about the distinction from the beginning,
illustrating causal association at E3.3 thus: “if we think of a wound, we can scarcely forbear re ﬂection
on the pain which follows it ”—an example of associative thought, but not custom.
22For more on this, see §4 of Millican (2009), from which the quotation in note 17 above is taken.
23For more discussion of this parallel, see Garrett (1997: 107 –8) and Millican (2009: 662 –6).
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 13By the time he came to write the Enquiry , Hume had apparently seen through this
mistake. Even though his argument concerning induction there is far more extended than
in the Treatise , and even though his de ﬁnitions of causation and necessity are emphasised
just as much, he makes no mention whatever of the distinction between philosophical
and natural relations.24This is entirely to be expected if the thoughts outlined here are
on the right track, but is hard to square with the presumption —which by now seems
highly implausible —that the distinction is of profound signi ﬁcance for the understanding
of his philosophy. It is the statement of a super ﬁcial ambiguity, which deserves to be
noted to clarify Hume ’s usage and avoid potential misreading, but that is all.
2. Relations: Locke and the Treatise
Having drawn the philosophical/natural distinction, Hume sets out to provide a complete
enumeration of the various types of quality “which make objects admit of comparison,
and by which the ideas of philosophical relation are produc ’d”(1.1.5.2). They fall, he
proposes, into just seven categories:
1.Resemblance : Hume remarks without further explanation that this is involved in
all relations since “no objects will admit of comparison, but what have some
degree of resemblance ”(T1.1.5.3).25Resemblance can generate association of
ideas, as we have seen (in which case it is also a natural relation), but it will
not usually do so if the resembling quality is “common to a great many individ-
uals”. Thus thinking of George won ’t naturally lead to thinking of John if their
only signi ﬁcant resemblance is that both are men, but it might do so if both are
great British empiricist philosophers, or if both are members of The Beatles.
2.Identity “as apply ’d in its strictest sense to constant and unchangeable objects ”
(T1.1.5.4): “Of all relations the most universal is that of identity, being com-
mon to every being, whose existence has any duration ”. Note therefore that
Hume is thinking here of identity over time .
3. Relations “ofspace and time, which are the sources of an in ﬁnite number of
comparisons, such as distant ,contiguous ,above ,below ,before ,after, &c. ”
(T1.1.5.5).
24In the Enquiry , the word “relation ”is generally used in the “philosophical ”sense (including within the
phrase “relations of ideas ”), but the “natural ”sense dominates at E5.14–20 when discussing the effects
of“relations or principles of association ”. The word is used in the everyday sense —as implying related-
ness—atE8.29 and 11.1.
25It is not clear why Hume makes this claim, which features in the numbered paragraphs 6 and 7 below,
and then only once later in the Treatise (atT1.4.5.11). Passmore (1980: 23 –4) suggests that he treats
resemblance as a logical surrogate for Lockean “agreement ”, as will be mentioned shortly. I suspect that
Hume inherited the doctrine from philosophers who were less clear on the natural/philosophical distinc-tion, and hence interpreted relation as requiring positive relatedness . Most pertinently, Francis Hutch-
eson, in his Synopsis of Metaphysics of 1742 (a Latin teaching text), states that “a property ...which is
common ”must form “aground ...in which [the objects] are compared or ...which affords a reason for
comparison ”(p. 106), and later con ﬁrms that where things have nothing in common, “there will be no
relation or connection between them ”(p. 124). Perhaps this in turn was intended to re ﬂect Locke ’s
thought that “There must always be in relation two ideas, or things, ...and then a ground or occasion
for their comparison. ”(Essay II xxv 6). But Locke himself allows that such “occasions of comparing ”
can involve disagreement as well as agreement (II xxv 7), which suggests that he is not committed to the
resemblance doctrine.
14 PETER MILLICAN4.“All those objects, which admit of quantity ,o rnumber , may be compar ’d in that
particular; which is another very fertile source of relation. ”(T1.1.5.6). When
later referring back to this category of relation, Hume calls it “proportion[s] in
quantity or number ”(T1.3.1.1 –3).
5.“When any two objects possess the same quality in common, the
degrees , in which they possess it, form a ﬁfth species of relation. ”(T1.1.5.7).
6.“The relation of contrariety may at ﬁrst sight be regarded as an exception to the
rule, that no relation of any kind can subsist without some degree of resem-
blance .26But ...no two ideas are in themselves contrary, except those of exis-
tence and non –existence, which are plainly resembling, as implying both of
them an idea of the object ”(T1.1.5.8).27
7.Cause and effect “is a seventh philosophical relation, as well as a natural one.
The resemblance imply ’d in this relation, shall be explain ’d afterwards ”.
(T1.1.5.9).
Hume ’s taxonomy of relations is clearly heavily in ﬂuenced by Locke ’s discussion (in
Book II of the Essay , chapters xxv to xxviii), which gives special emphasis in turn to
“Cause and Effect ”(II xxvi 1 –2),“Relations of Time ”(II xxvi 3 –4),“Relations of Place
and Extension ”(II xxvi 5), “Identity and Diversity ”(II xxvii), and “Proportional Rela-
tions ”(II xxviii 1). The last of these embraces both what Hume calls “degrees in quality ”
and“proportions in quantity or number ”:
...some one simple Idea; which being capable of Parts or Degrees, affords an occasion
of comparing the Subjects wherein it is to one another, in respect of that simple Idea,
v.g. Whiter ,Sweeter ,Bigger ,Equal ,More , etc. These Relations depending on the Equal-
ity and Excess of the same simple Idea, in several Subjects, may be called, if one will,
Proportional ...(Essay II xxviii 1)
But after this, Locke goes on to deal with a range of other relations, remarking that
there are “inﬁnite others ”(II xxviii 1). He starts with what he calls “natural Rela-
tions ”such as “Father and Son,Brothers ...Country-men ”(II xxviii 2),28contrasting
these with “Instituted ,o r Voluntary ”relations such as “General ...,Citizen ,...
Patron and Client ,...Constable ,o r Dictator ”(II xxviii 3). He then moves on to a
26Contrariety is not the same as difference , which according to Hume is “a negation of relation ”and“of
two kinds as oppos ’d either to identity or resemblance. The ﬁrst is call ’d a difference of number ; the
other of kind.”(T1.1.5.10).
27This perfunctory argument seems to draw on Hume ’s treatment of the idea of existence in the section
“Of the idea of existence, and of external existence ”:“The idea of existence ...is the very same with
the idea of what we conceive to be existent. To re ﬂect on any thing simply, and to re ﬂect on it as exis-
tent, are nothing different from each other. ”(T1.2.6.4). Perhaps the argument is best interpreted as
claiming that contrariety is always relative to some object, property or proposition P, so that denial-of-P
is then contrary to assertion-of-P , and these resemble in both making reference to P. Difﬁculties will then
arise, however, with objects or properties that can take a range of mutually exclusive values, or proposi-tions that are contrary rather than contradictory —see also note 36 below.
28Note that Locke ’s“natural relations ”, based mainly on blood relationships, are quite different from
Hume ’s. As explained in §1 above, a Humean “natural relation ”is one that corresponds to a natural asso-
ciation of ideas (from resemblance, contiguity, or causation), in which an idea of the one related thingnaturally leads to an idea of the other.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 15variety of moral relations (II xxviii 4 –16), before ending with some general re ﬂections
(II xxviii 17 –20).
If we take Locke ’s“Diversity ”to map onto contrariety ,29then of Hume ’s seven
types of “philosophical relation ”, only the ﬁrst,resemblance , is absent from Locke ’s
list. However this is clearly a very special case, since Hume has stressed that resem-
blance is present in allinstances of comparison between objects (which as we have
seen, is what supposedly gives rise to ideas of relation). As such, it seems that resem-
blance is broadly taking the place, within Hume ’s system, of Locke ’s general notion of
agreement :30
[A] man may at once be ...capable of as many relations, as there can be occasions of
comparing him to other things, in any manner of agreement, disagreement, or respectwhatsoever. For ...relation is a way of comparing or considering two things together,
and giving one or both of them some appellation from that comparison; and sometimes
giving even the relation itself a name. ( Essay II xxv 7)
For his part, Locke apparently omits resemblance from his own list because he would
classify any similarity between things not in terms of “resemblance ”as a category, but
rather in terms of the respect in which they resemble , for example “the Equality ...of
the same simple Ideas , in several Subjects ”(II xxviii 1: a “proportional relation ”), or
“Country-men ,i.e.those who were born in the same Country ”(II xxviii 2: a “natural
relation ”). This would involve a huge proliferation of types of resemblance relation, of
which “’Twould make a Volume, to go over all sorts ”(Essay II xxviii 17). But Hume
wants none of this, because as we shall see he has important philosophical reasons for
wanting to truncate Locke ’s list, so as to pin down more narrowly the categories of rela-
tion on offer. This agenda, indeed, seems to have a signi ﬁcant impact as early as the pre-
vious short section on the association of ideas, two paragraphs of which are devoted to
arguing very explicitly (but without mentioning names) that both Locke ’s“natural rela-
tions ”and his “instituted relations ”can be subsumed under the general relation of “cau-
sation ”:
In general we may observe, that all the relations of blood depend upon cause and effect,
and are esteemed near or remote, according to the number of connecting causes inter-pos’d betwixt the persons. ( T1.1.4.3)
We may carry this farther, and remark, not only that two objects are connected by the
relation of cause and effect, when the one produces a motion or any action in the other,
but also when it has a power of producing it. And this we may observe to be the sourceof all the relations of interest and duty, by which men in ﬂuence each other in society,
and are plac ’d in the ties of government and subordination. ( T1.1.4.5)
29Locke says very little speci ﬁcally about diversity , treating it as merely non-identity. It therefore has a
structural similarity to Hume ’scontrariety , which as we have seen is explained in terms of existence and
non-existence. For both philosophers, the relation in question seems to function primarily as a means ofrecognising the need for some form of negation within their taxonomy, though neither of them explores
this function with any care or rigour.
30And also to some extent Lockean disagreement , as suggested by Passmore (1980: 23 –4), whose discus-
sion of Hume ’s theory of relations, dating mainly from 1952, remains one of the best and most insightful
in the literature.
16 PETER MILLICANThe focus on human relations here, as Kemp Smith prominently remarked, can seem
rather “puzzling ”, but there is no need to follow him in seeing it as evidence of
Hume ’s having a prior and predominant interest in ethics.31On the contrary, it makes
perfect sense on the assumption that Hume ’s aim is quite speci ﬁcally to oppose
Locke ’s multiplicity of relations, and thus to impose a reduced taxonomy. If
relations of blood, institution and morals are removed from Locke ’s list, and “agree-
ment ”added, then as already explained, we get an extremely close match between
the two:
This seems far too close for coincidence, and establishes beyond reasonable doubt the
indebtedness of Hume ’s taxonomy to that of Locke.
3. Hume ’s Dichotomy, and Demonstrability
Hume ’s interest in reducing Locke ’s potentially “inﬁnite”categorisation of relations to
just seven starts to emerge only at the beginning of Treatise Book 1 Part 3, “Of knowl-
edge and probability ”:
THERE are seven different kinds of philosophical relation, viz. resemblance ,identity ,rela-
tions of time and place ,proportion in quantity or number ,degrees in any quality ,contra-
riety,and causation . These relations may be divided into two classes; into such as
depend entirely on the ideas, which we compare together, and such as may be chang ’d
without any change in the ideas. ( T1.3.1.1)
It is possible that a hint for this dichotomy came from Locke ’s marginal summary to
Essay II xxv 5: “Change of Relation may be without any Change in the Subject ”. ButLocke Hume
(Agreement) Resemblance
Cause and effect Cause and effect
Relations of time Space and time
Relations of place and extension
Identity IdentityDiversity ContrarietyProportional relations Proportions in quantity or number
Degrees in quality
31Kemp Smith (1941: 245): “The only answer, in any degree satisfactory, to [various questions about
Hume ’s theory of association] is, I should contend, supplied by the view, already outlined, that the bulk
of Books II and III is prior, both in the ﬁrst thinking-out of their teaching and in the date of ﬁrst compo-
sition, to the treatment of association in Book I, where, it will be observed, association by causality isillustrated exclusively by those examples of blood and social relationship which are required for the pur-
poses of Hume ’s argument in Books II and III. ”The chronology implied by Kemp Smith ’s hypothesis is
scarcely credible, given the relative speed with which Hume wrote (at least) the bulk of Books 1 and 2of the Treatise in France between 1734 until 1737 and then published them in January 1739, around 21
months prior to the publication of Book 3.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 17Hume is apparently quite original in aiming to use such a division within the taxonomy
of relations to pin down those relations “which depending solely on ideas, can be the
objects of knowledge and certainty ”(I shall call these constant relations, echoing Hume ’s
apparent usage at T1.3.2.2).32He continues:
These four are resemblance ,contrariety ,degrees in quality , and proportions in quantity
or number . Three of these relations are discoverable at ﬁrst sight, and fall more properly
under the province of intuition than demonstration. When any objects resemble each
other, the resemblance will at ﬁrst strike the eye, or rather the mind; and seldom requires
a second examination. The case is the same with contrariety , and with the degrees of any
quality ....
We might proceed, after the same manner, in ﬁxing the proportions ofquantity or
number ...
I have already observ ’d, that geometry, or the art, by which we ﬁx the proportions of
ﬁgures; tho ’it much excels both in universality and exactness, the loose judgments of the
senses and imagination; yet never attains a perfect precision and exactness. Its ﬁrst princi-
ples are still drawn from the general appearance of the objects; and that appearance can
never afford us any security, when we examine the prodigious minuteness of which nat-ure is susceptible. ...
There remain, therefore, algebra and arithmetic as the only sciences, in which we
can carry on a chain of reasoning to any degree of intricacy, and yet preserve a perfectexactness and certainty. We are possest of a precise standard, by which we can judge
of the equality and proportion of numbers; and according as they correspond or not to
that standard, we determine their relations, without any possibility of error. When twonumbers are so combin ’d, as that the one has always an unite answering to every unite
of the other, we pronounce them equal;
33and’tis for want of such a standard of equal-
ity in extension, that geometry can scarce be esteem ’d a perfect and infallible science.
(T1.3.1.2 –5)
So the aim of Hume ’s Dichotomy between constant and inconstant relations is to
delimit those areas —notably mathematics —that are susceptible of intuitive or demon-
strative proof, and thus to undermine the ambitions of those philosophers who would
attempt to achieve certainty beyond these bounds. Later, Hume appeals to this
analysis in two speci ﬁc cases, ﬁrst to deny that the Causal Maxim can be intuitively
certain:
All certainty arises from the comparison of ideas, and from the discovery of such
relations as are unalterable, so long as the ideas continue the same. These relations
areresemblance ,proportions in quantity and number ,degrees of any quality ,and
contrariety ; none of which are imply ’d in this proposition, Whatever has a beginning
has also a cause of existence . That proposition therefore is not intuitively certain.
(T1.3.3.2)
32It is not entirely clear that Hume is indeed alluding to this distinction when he talks of “relations, either
constant or inconstant ”, but this terminology is by now familiar to scholars, and as appropriate as any. At
T1.3.3.2, Hume talks of the privileged group of relations as being “unalterable, so long as the ideas con-
tinue the same ”and as “infallible ”.
33This clause, de ﬁning numerical equality in terms of one-to-one correspondence, was quoted approvingly
by Frege (1884, §63), and has since become well known within the Philosophy of Mathematics as
“Hume ’s Principle ”.
18 PETER MILLICANAnd secondly to deny that relations of virtue and vice are demonstrable:
If you assert, that vice and virtue consist in relations susceptible of certainty and
demonstration, you must con ﬁne yourself to those four relations, which alone admit
of that degree of evidence; and in that case you run into absurdities ...Resemblance ,
contrariety ,degrees in quality , and proportions in quantity and number ; all these rela-
tions belong as properly to matter, as to our actions, passions, and volitions. ’Tis
unquestionable, therefore, that morality lies not in any of these relations, nor the sense
of it in their discovery. ( T3.1.1.19)
Although Hume ’s aims here are clear enough, he is never explicit about the principle to
which he is appealing. If, for simplicity, we subsume both intuitive and demonstrative cer-tainty under the single term “demonstrable ”, then his wording at T1.3.3.2 suggests the fol-
lowing:
(a) Any demonstrable proposition must involve some constant relation.
However this principle would become completely vacuous when combined with Hume ’s
claim that resemblance —one of the constant group —is involved in allrelations
(T1.1.5.3). On this basis, no relational proposition (not even the Causal Maxim itself)
could be ruled out as non-demonstrable.
34More plausibly, the wording at T3.1.1.19
seems to suggest a different principle:
(b) Any demonstrable proposition can involve only constant relations.
But as we shall see, any principle of this kind —and indeed Hume ’s Dichotomy itself —is
deeply problematic, and he presumably came to see this, because both disappear entirely
from his later works.
The problems with the Dichotomy start right at the beginning, with resem-
blance . Hume claims boldly that this is “discoverable at ﬁrst sight ”and knowable by
intuition, but such a claim is ridiculous if intended to cover all of the wide range
of resemblances that things can bear to each other.35Hume ’s language suggests
that he is attracted to this claim from a visual understanding of resemblance, but
also that he wishes to generalise beyond that: “When any objects resemble
each other, the resemblance will at ﬁrst strike the eye, or rather the mind ”(my
34Recently Don Garrett has sketched a defence of Hume by appeal to his theory of abstract ideas: “it is
hard to see how the four [constant] relations ...could suf ﬁce...to underwrite all knowledge in the strict
sense ...without the relations of resemblance that are offered by abstract ideas sharing elements of their
revival sets ”(2015: 58). Garrett also argues that Hume “must ”recognise idealized revival sets, which are
not con ﬁned to objects of the thinker ’s experience but “would result from an inde ﬁnite extension of
veridical experience ...”(p. 56). It would be interesting to see this theory spelled out in detail, but I
remain extremely sceptical, since I do not believe that any viable theory of demonstrability has ever beendeveloped along these lines, and it is well known that a proposition ’s demonstrability often depends not
so much on the speci ﬁc predicates or relations involved, as on the ordering and implied scope of “quanti-
ﬁers”and connectives. Moreover Garrett ’s proposal looks vulnerable to essentially the same objection as
stated here. For on such a theory, anyuniversal claim (e.g. the Causal Maxim, which according to T
1.3.3.2 does not imply any resemblance) will be proposing an overlap —and hence resemblance —between
the idealized revival sets of two abstract ideas (e.g. “things that begin to exist ”,“things that have a cause
of existence ”), and thus will fail to be excluded by Hume ’s criterion as understood in (a).
35All the more so if my suggestion in §2 above is correct, that Hume intends “resemblance ”to cover the
multitude of types of resemblance that Locke would have classi ﬁed separately.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 19emphasis). And his only plausible defensive move seems to be to restrict his
understanding of resemblance, in so far as it quali ﬁes as a constant relation
amenable to intuitive and demonstrative certainty, to types of resemblance that follow
immediately and evidently from the nature of what is compared. Much the same can
be said about contrariety (assuming that this is intended to cover dissimilarity),36and
also degrees in quality , where Hume ’s text suggests at least some awareness of the
problem:
...tho’it be impossible to judge exactly of the degrees of any quality, such as colour,
taste, heat, cold, when the difference betwixt them is very small; yet ’tis easy to
decide, that any of them is superior or inferior to another, when their difference is
considerable. And this decision we always pronounce at ﬁrst sight, without any enquiry
or reasoning. ( T1.3.1.2)
His obvious fallback position, therefore, would be to insist that intuition and demonstra-
tion are limited to the four relations of resemblance ,contrariety ,degrees in quality , and
proportions in quantity or number , and limited moreover to a narrow range of the imme-
diately evident within the ﬁrst three of these. This disrupts his relatively tidy taxonomy,
and he no longer has a clean division —within the seven kinds of relation —between four
that are constant and three inconstant, but the price might be worth paying if it worked.
Sadly, though, it doesn ’t get close. As Locke had pointed out ( Essay IV ii 9), intuitive
relationships are not restricted to a narrow range of ideas, and hence counterexamples to
this fallback position are very easy to ﬁnd. For instance we saw in §2 that human family
relationships, on Hume ’s own account, are instances of “causation ”, but this in no way
prevents us from ﬁnding intuitive or demonstrative truths about them. “Every mother is a
parent ”is an instance of the former; “Anyone whose paternal grandparents have two
sons, has an uncle ”of the latter. There is also the obvious point that demonstrative argu-
ments “involving quantity or number ”can themselves concern other relations also (e.g. a
proof that “In any group of seven or more families, each with two sons and two daugh-
ters, at least two of the families must have the same male-female birth order. ”). Hume
has not even gestured towards taking these into account, and his apparent implicit princi-
ple that any demonstrable proposition can involve only constant relations therefore seems
36Hume says so little about contrariety, and what he says is so unsatisfactory, that it is hard to know
exactly how to interpret his view of it. We have already seen, in §2 above (cf. note 27), his crude and
undefended claim that “no two ideas are in themselves contrary, except those of existence and non-exis-
tence, which are plainly resembling, as implying both of them an idea of the object ”(T1.1.5.8). The
immediately following paragraph continues: “7. All other objects, such as ﬁre and water, heat and cold,
are only found to be contrary from experience, and from the contrariety of their causes oreffects ; which
relation of cause and effect is a seventh philosophical relation ...”. Here Hume is apparently anticipating
his discussion “Of the probability of causes ”atT1.3.12.3 –19, but his position seems almost self-contra-
dictory. Suppose, for example, that ﬁre and water can indeed be “found to be contrary ”indirectly ,“from
the contrariety of their ...effects ”. This then clearly presupposes that those effects are contrary —either
directly or indirectly —and so by following this regress, at some point we must reach effects that are di-
rectly contrary. Yet it is hard to see how they can be so, if “no two ideas ...except those of existence
and non-existence ”are“in themselves contrary ”. The only way I can see of making sense of this is an
assumption that in applying probability, I need only weigh up how often an object Ahas caused Bas
opposed to not(B) . But the suggestion that we can do all the reasoning we need without ever having to
judge whether Bis contrary to some alternatives CorD(e.g. different possible outcomes, or temperatures
in a range) seems very dubious, and Hume says nothing to defend it.
20 PETER MILLICANboth hopelessly unargued and completely false.37Nor does it seem at all likely that any
similar principle will be defensible, and his cursory discussion gives no basis for opti-
mism that it is possible to derive a sound criterion of demonstrability based on the rela-
tions involved in a proposition.
How could Hume, who is generally so acute, make such a bad mistake over relations?
Jonathan Bennett, in two excellent discussions of the issue, attributes this to an ambiguity
in Hume ’s Dichotomy.38On the one hand, he suggests that Hume wants “to distinguish
(a) relations between ideas which do yield analytic [or a priori] truths from (b) ones
which do not ”(1971: 252).39On the other hand, Bennett detects a second understanding
of the Dichotomy, corresponding to “the line between (a) reducible and (b) irreducible
relations ”(p. 253), where a relational property is reducible if its holding between xandy
can be factored into, or supervenes on, the properties of xandyindividually. This diag-
nosis is attractive because it seems to make good sense of where Hume draws his line,
and also the language in which he expresses it. Consider again the key passage:
THERE are seven different kinds of philosophical relation, viz. resemblance ,identity ,rela-
tions of time and place ,proportion in quantity or number ,degrees in any quality ,contra-
riety,and causation . These relations may be divided into two classes; into such as
depend entirely on the ideas, which we compare together, and such as may be chang ’d
without any change in the ideas. ( T1.3.1.1)
The phrase “such as depend entirely on the ideas, which we compare together ”does
sound very like an expression of Bennett ’sreducibility : the relation ’s holding between
(our ideas of) xandydepends only on the individual properties of (our ideas of) xandy,
and hence is supervenient . Such a relation cannot therefore “be chang ’d without any
change in ”(our ideas of) xandythemselves. Moreover as Bennett goes on to explain,40
The supervenient/non-supervenient reading is strongly con ﬁrmed by what [Hume] says
about where his (a)/(b) line falls. He says that (a) contains just four (species of) relations:namely, resemblance ,contrariety ,degrees in quality , and proportions in quantity and
number . Instances of these would be, respectively, “has the same colour as ”,“has a differ-
ent colour from ”,“is warmer than ”, and “has more legs than ”, all of which are superve-
nient. As for the three (species of) relations which Hume says exhaust (b), two of these
[relations of time and place andcause and effect ] are clearly non-supervenient, and we
can at least see why Hume would place [ identity ] in that category. ...Hume is thinking of
37Bennett (1971: 256 cf. 2001: 244) gives the example “Any earthquake which causes every house to fall
down causes every small house to fall down ”. And of course there are countless others to be had, includ-
ing not only tautologies of this general sort (corresponding to theorems of ﬁrst-order logic if represented
appropriately), but any number of other demonstrable propositions from rule-governed systems outside
mathematics and logic of which Hume takes no account (e.g. the law, or chess: “It is possible for White
to be checkmated in two moves from the initial position. ”).
38Bennett ’s two discussions, in his 1971: 250 –6 and 2001: 242 –4, seem to be by far the most detailed dis-
cussions in the literature. It is a shame that more commentators have not made the attempt to grapple
seriously with what is going on in Hume ’s thinking here, especially those who take his Dichotomy to be
interpretatively authoritative.
39In his 1971, Bennett expresses this idea in terms of analyticity. In his 2001 (p. 243) he prefers to say that
Hume is dividing “relations into supervenient and not, and ...propositions into a priori knowable and
not”.
40In this quotation and the next I have silently replaced “1”with “(a)”and“2”with “(b)”, so as to conform
to the notation used in Bennett ’s earlier discussion. I have also used italics instead of Bennett ’s boldface.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 21identity as in statements of the form “The thing that is F at T 1is the thing that is G at T 2”,
and making the point that no piling on of monadic descriptions of how the former is at T 1,
and the latter at T 2, will decisively settle whether this is one thing or two. (2001: 242 –3)
Bennett does not explain in so much detail how Hume ’s discussion ﬁts with his ﬁrst dis-
tinction, between (a) relations that yield analytic (or a priori) truths and (b) those that do
not, but the general idea is clear enough:
Taking “ideas ”as meanings or concepts, Hume is distinguishing (a) propositions that are
knowable a priori, because they owe their truth purely to the natures of the concepts they
involve, from (b) ones that are knowable only a posteriori, because they owe their truthpartly to how the actual world is arranged. (2001: 243)
It seems that Hume must be appealing to something like this when he says that only the
constant (a) relations “can be the objects of knowledge and certainty ”(T1.3.1.2). And as
Bennett points out, Hume ’s explanation of why cause and effect is not constant ﬁts this
account precisely:
...as the power, by which one object produces another, is never discoverable merely
from their ideas, ’tis evident cause and effect are relations, of which we receive informa-
tion from experience, and not from any abstract reasoning or re ﬂection. ( T1.3.1.1)
Here the emphasis is clearly on epistemology, on what is “discoverable ...from ...
ideas ”, rather than on anything to do with supervenience.
Bennett ’s account is very illuminating, but I believe there is another factor in play
which he somewhat overlooks, namely, Hume ’s failure to distinguish clearly between ob-
jects andideas of objects .41Since the crucial Dichotomy is introduced in Treatise 1.3.1,
“Of knowledge ”, it is not surprising that Hume ’s interest here concerns not so much the
relations of objects themselves, as how much we can know of them . Any such knowl-
edge, for Hume, must be mediated by our ideas of the objects concerned, so it is entirely
natural that he should focus on those ideas and what can be discovered through them.
But then it is very easy indeed to slide between what is implied by the properties of the
objects themselves (independently of further information about their relative situation
etc.) and what is implied by the ideas of the objects themselves (independently of other
ideas). The former leads to Bennett ’s supervenient interpretation, and the latter to his ana-
lytic (or a priori) interpretation. As an example of the former, the proposition that Venus
is larger than Mars is actually true, and could not cease to be true without a change in
the objects themselves, but nothing in the typical person ’s idea of Venus and Mars guar-
antees this. As an example of the latter, the proposition that the furthest planet is no clo-
ser than the closest planet can be known a priori based on the ideas involved,42but this
does not imply that comparative distance is reducible (in Bennett ’s sense), nor that dis-
tance is an intrinsic property of the objects. Overall, then, my diagnosis is that Hume, by
conducting his Treatise discussion at too high a level of abstraction, without drawing a
41When discussing the supervenience interpretation, Bennett remarks that it “really classi ﬁes relations
between items of any kind, not only between ideas ”(2001: 242) and his subsequent discussion proceeds
accordingly.
42Here for simplicity we ignore complications about non-existence.
22 PETER MILLICANclear distinction between objects and ideas, and without enough concrete examples to
keep the discussion properly anchored, seems to have confused himself between two
quite different ways in which a relational claim can “depend only on the ideas ”of the
relevant objects. Under the supervenient interpretation, such a relational claim ’s truth is
determined by the individual properties of those objects and is otherwise independent of
their situation. Under the analytic (or a priori) interpretation, the relational claim ’s truth
can be known by reference to the individual ideas of those objects without appeal to any
further information about their situation. Looked at abstractly in this way the two are
indeed very easy to con ﬂate, and it seems that Hume did exactly that. He then went on
to develop a theory about the limits of demonstration which made good sense under thelatter interpretation (that a demonstrative proof can build only on a priori relations of
ideas) but no sense at all under the former (that a relation ’s being supervenient somehow
makes it specially amenable to demonstrative proof). Yet it is that nonsensical interpreta-
tion which kindled Hume ’s novel idea that the relations involved in a proposition deter-
mine its potential demonstrability.
Hume ’s theory is very sketchy and unargued, and he does virtually nothing with it
except at two speci ﬁc points in the Treatise (T1.3.3.2 and 3.1.1.19), as quoted ear-
lier. Even here he seems less than entirely convinced, going on immediately to sup-
plement his case with further arguments. Moreover his supplementary argument for
the non –demonstrability of the Causal Maxim (at T1.3.3.3) employs an alternative
criterion which, though inspired by a similar underlying thought to his Dichotomy —
that a demonstration can build only on a priori relations of ideas —is entirely indepen-
dent of his confused taxonomy of relations. This alternative criterion is based on what
is commonly known as his Conceivability Principle , that “whatever we conceive is
possible ”(T1.4.5.10) which, as we shall see in §§4–5 below, is widely used in the
Treatise and fully maintained in Hume ’s later works (e.g. A11,E4.18, D9.5).
43By
contrast, it seems likely that he eventually recognised the inadequacy of his analysis
in terms of constant and inconstant relations (perhaps under pressure from counterex-
amples such as those we have seen). And although we cannot know when exactly
this happened, all trace of it had disappeared by the time he came to write the ﬁrst
Enquiry , with its explicit discussion of applied mathematics ( E4.13) that clearly refers
to demonstrations involving the (paradigmatically causal) notion of force . By then,
Hume had evidently come to realise that “inconstant ”relations such as causation can
after all play a role in demonstrative argument, and his Dichotomy was accordingly —
and rightly —abandoned.
To provide a criterion of (non-)demonstrability, the Conceivability Principle —that
conceivability implies possibility —simply needs to be combined with the principle that
nothing which is possible can be demonstrated to be false (as for example at T1.3.6.5,
cf.T1.2.2.8 –10, 1.3.3.3, 1.3.14.13). In order to make sense of this latter principle,
however, it is essential to recognise that something ’sbeing demonstrated requires
more than its simply being the conclusion of some demonstrative argument . Any
argument by means of logically valid Aristotelian syllogisms, for example, must count as
demonstrative for Locke and Hume, because syllogisms rely on “relations of ideas ”
43The supplementary argument at T1.3.3.3 also appeals to (what is commonly called) Hume ’s Separability
Principle of T1.1.3.4 and 1.1.7.3, which in the Treatise is sometimes combined with the Conceivability
Principle (cf. T1.3.6.1, 1.4.3.7, 1.4.5.5) but disappears from the Enquiry .
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 23(E4.2) that are “constant, immutable, and visible ”(Essay IV xv 1), rather than on
merely “probable connexions ”or causal assumptions.44But if such an argument starts
from premises that are false, then clearly it cannot count as a demonstration of its conclu-
sion, and that conclusion cannot thereby be said to have been demonstrated .45This dis-
tinction is clear enough in everyday English, and Hume ’s usage is consistent with it, but
he never acknowledges it, perhaps because when he talks of demonstrative arguments,
his interest is usually in what they can or cannot prove . He also thinks that informative
demonstrative arguments —as opposed to trivial syllogisms —tend to be con ﬁned to math-
ematics, where again deductive proof is typically the aim.46He does, however, discuss
some demonstrative arguments from contingent premises —most importantly involving
applied mathematics —which are, accordingly, demonstrative arguments with conclusions
that are not thereby demonstrated and whose negations are possible.47Hence when he
denies the possibility of demonstrating the falsehood of something that is possible, he
must indeed, on pain of inconsistency, be implicitly recognising the distinction between
an argument ’s being demonstrative (or in modern terms deductively valid ), and its being
ademonstration of (i.e. a deductive proof of ) its conclusion.48
Hume ’s Fork arises very naturally from the combination of the Conceivability Prin-
ciple—conceivability implies possibility —with the principle that nothing which is possi-
ble can be demonstrated to be false . As we shall see, this brings a considerable
simpli ﬁcation in the logical framework of the Enquiry as compared with the Treatise ,
where the relationship between Hume ’s Dichotomy and Conceivability Principle
remains unexamined and obscure. Nevertheless, as mentioned at the beginning of this
paper, scholarly tradition has overwhelmingly viewed his Dichotomy as more authorita-
tive than his Fork. Thus Helen Beebee, one of the most recent contributors to this tra-
dition, focuses mainly on Hume ’s theory of relations in the Treatise , then extrapolates
it to the Enquiry with the comment that although “Hume does not mention philosophi-
cal relations at all in the Enquiry ,...it is clear that he still has more or less the same
underlying view in the later work. ”(Beebee 2006: 19). This leads her into a careful
and sensitive discussion that attempts to ﬁt together Hume ’s“three distinctions: the dis-
tinction between class Aand class Brelations [i.e. the Dichotomy]; the distinction
between what can and cannot be ‘demonstrated ’; and the distinction between what can
44Each individual step in a syllogistic argument will be intuitive , and a demonstration is a sequence of intu-
itive steps ( Essay IV ii 7). Locke talks of “probable connexion ”atEssay IV xvii 2 and 4. Hume insists
that probable arguments rely on causal relations ( T1.3.6.6 –7,E4.4), rather than on the relations of ideas
that characterise demonstrations.
45Suppose I argue: “All birds are swans. All swans are white. Therefore all birds are white. ”My argument
is demonstratively valid, but I clearly have not demonstrated that all birds are white. By analogy with
verbs, one might say that this argument is a “demonstration ”in an intransitive sense (i.e. it is demonstra-
tively valid), but not in a transitive sense (i.e. it does not provide a demonstration of its conclusion ).
46Hume ’s explanation is that only mathematical ideas interconnect suf ﬁciently precisely to allow lengthy
but secure chains of reasoning: see T1.3.1.5 (quoted near the beginning of §3 above), and E12.27 (dis-
cussed in §4 below).
47AtT2.3.3.2 Hume considers demonstrative reasoning about ﬁnancial accounts (and also mentions
mechanics). At E4.13 he considers an application of the conservation of momentum (stressing that the
physical law is contingent and known only by experience), and at E4.18 the attempt to demonstrate
future uniformity from past observed uniformity. At T1.2.4.10 he apparently recognises that a demon-
stration—so far from having to start from premises known to be true —can serve as a reductio ad absur-
dum of its premise.
48For longer expositions of the argument of this paragraph, see the references in note 3 above.
24 PETER MILLICANand cannot be known with certainty. ”Here Beebee endorses David Owen ’s view that
Hume ’s Dichotomy rules out an understanding of “demonstration ”as anything like
valid deduction (cf. Owen 1999: 93 –4).49She then proceeds —as does Owen —to
develop an elaborate theory of Humean demonstration that attempts to make sense of
what is, I believe, ultimately incoherent.50In doing so, both scholars apply vastly more
subtle analysis than is apparent in Hume ’s own discussion of relations, and they are
far too respectful of it. Neither of them remarks on the crude derivativeness of Hume ’s
taxonomy from that of Locke, nor alludes to Bennett ’s insightful diagnosis of the
Dichotomy ’s confusions,51nor considers the possibility that Hume might have omitted
all this from the Enquiry not for the sake of brevity, but instead to be rid of it. If my
discussion in this section has been on the right lines, however, then the latter is very
much more likely.
Before leaving Hume ’s theory of relations, it is worth brie ﬂy mentioning a further
blind alley into which he was led by it. We have seen how in T1.3.1.1 –2 he presents
his Dichotomy between the four constant and three inconstant relations. But his analysis
goes further than this, drawing subdivisions within each category. Consider again the
beginning of the long passage quoted near the start of this section, where he prepares to
divide up the constant relations:
These four are resemblance ,contrariety ,degrees in quality , and proportions in quantity
or number . Three of these relations are discoverable at ﬁrst sight, and fall more properly
under the province of intuition than demonstration. ( T1.3.1.2)
Hume quickly concludes that only proportions of quantity or number give any prospect
of grounding “a chain of reasoning ”that we can “carry on ...to any degree of intricacy,
and yet preserve a perfect exactness and certainty ”(T1.3.1.5): he thus delimits “the pro-
vince ”ofdemonstration . Now compare the following passage from the next section of
theTreatise , in which Hume divides up the inconstant relations in a somewhat similar
manner:
49Beebee (pp. 20 –1) also accepts Owen ’s claim (p. 87) —inherited from Stove (1973: 35) —that “Hume
says ...frequently ...that there are no demonstrative arguments with conclusions that are possibly
false”. Owen (p. 87 n. 8) acknowledges that Millican (1995) contests the claim (as in my previous para-
graph), but unfortunately neither he nor Beebee (2007: 413) addresses this fundamental objection to their
account, nor indeed takes any notice of Hume ’s repeated acknowledgement of applied mathematics,
which has to be “the crucial test case ”(Millican 2007a: 177).
50Beebee ’s theory is implausibly complex, involving consideration of the Separability Principle as well as
the Conceivability Principle, and incorporating a distinction between demonstration anddeduction (in the
modern sense) which Hume supposedly “implicitly recognizes ”(p. 30), even though he apparently lacks
any term of his own for the latter. Owen ’s theory is simpler, but I believe takes Locke ’s vague hints
about chains of ideas ( Essay IV xvii 2 –4) far more seriously than they deserve, both philosophically and
as applied to Hume. Locke ’s chain model is hopeless for dealing with inferences involving multiple pre-
mises and/or quanti ﬁed propositions, while any in ﬂuence that it might have had on Hume seems to have
evaporated by the time of the Enquiry , which speaks far more of propositions and their logical relations
than of sequences of ideas (cf. Millican 2002: 113 nn. 15, 16).
51Beebee (2006: 19 and 226, n. 4) does, however, mention Bennett ’s 1971 book as contributing to the
“standard way ”of understanding Hume ’s distinctions along the lines of the necessary/contingent, ana-
lytic/synthetic, and deduction/induction distinctions.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 25...the other three [relations], which depend not upon the idea, and may be absent or pre-
sent even while that remains the same ...areidentity ,the situations in time and place ,
andcausation .
All kinds of reasoning consist in nothing but a comparison , and a discovery of those
relations, either constant or inconstant, which two or more objects bear to each other.
This comparison we may make, either when both the objects are present to the senses, or
when neither of them is present, or when only one. When both the objects are present tothe senses along with the relation, we call thisperception rather than reasoning; nor is
there in this case any exercise of the thought ...but a mere passive admission of the
impressions thro ’the organs of sensation. According to this way of thinking, we ought
not to receive as reasoning any of the observations we may make concerning identity ,
and the relations of time and place ; since in none of them the mind can go beyond what
is immediately present to the senses, either to discover the real existence or the relations
of objects. ’Tis only causation , which produces such a connexion ...nor can the other
two relations be ever made use of in reasoning, except so far as they either affect or are
affected by it ...
Here then it appears, that of those three relations, which depend not upon the mere
ideas, the only one, that can be trac ’d beyond our senses, and informs us of existences
and objects, which we do not see or feel, is causation ...(T1.3.2.1 –3)
It is easy to appreciate the elegant appeal of the resulting architectonic structure, lining
up the operations of the mind against the seven different types of relation:
Constant relations Inconstant relations
PerceptionIntuition
resemblance
contrariety
degrees in quality Sensory Perception
identity
situations in time and 
place
ReasoningDemonstration
proportions in  
quantity and numberProbability
causation
This must have seemed an attractively systematic way of explaining both why successful
demonstrative argument is concentrated in the mathematical sciences, and also why
probable argument typically involves causal relations. Captivated by the thought that the
key to these things could be found in the relations involved, Hume ’s imagination got to
work and ﬁlled in the structure accordingly. But unfortunately it is a failure: both
demonstrative and probable argument can involve any of the relations concerned, as
becomes clear as soon as one considers practical examples (e.g. astronomical calcula-
tions about the position, identity, temperature or apparent similarity of comets; or induc-tive con ﬁrmation of the principles from which those calculations start). It should be no
surprise, then —and is to Hume ’s credit—that after the Treatise all this was completely
abandoned.
Although Hume ’s systematic categorisation of relations, with his Dichotomy at its
heart, is abandoned in the Enquiry , it is very tempting to take it as authoritative for his
philosophical logic, because it presents a complex and interesting theory which is
26 PETER MILLICANtherefore presumed to be carefully worked out. If we then observe, with Beebee, that
Hume “still has more or less the same underlying view in the later work ”(2006: 19), it
is again very tempting to extrapolate the authority of the Dichotomy from the Treatise to
theEnquiry , as she and many other scholars have done.52But this is all the wrong way
round. Hume ’s“underlying view ”in the two works is indeed similar, but that should
lead us to expect that the genuinely fundamental principles will be apparent not only in
theTreatise , but in both works.53And in that case the core of Hume ’s“underlying view ”
about the limits of demonstration must be encapsulated not in his sketchy and ill-
thought-out Dichotomy —which rarely features even in the Treatise—but instead in his
Conceivability Principle, which is prominent in both works. It is this, rather than theDichotomy, that provides Hume ’s central criterion of demonstrability, and thus becomes
the demarcation principle behind his “Fork”.
4. Hume ’s Fork, and Its Various Criteria
After the complications of his account of relations in the Treatise , with its dif ﬁculties,
ambiguities and confusions, Hume ’s corresponding discussion in the Enquiry comes as a
welcome relief. In just two elegant and justly famous paragraphs, he sets the scene for
the discussion of induction to follow:
ALLthe objects of human reason or enquiry may naturally be divided into two kinds, to
wit,Relations of Ideas , and Matters of Fact . Of the ﬁrst kind are the sciences of Geome-
try, Algebra, and Arithmetic; and in short, every af ﬁrmation, which is either intuitively or
demonstratively certain. That the square of the hypothenuse is equal to the square of the
two sides , is a proposition, which expresses a relation between these ﬁgures.54That three
times ﬁve is equal to the half of thirty , expresses a relation between these numbers.
Propositions of this kind are discoverable by the mere operation of thought, withoutdependence on what is any where existent in the universe. Though there never were a cir-
cle or triangle in nature, the truths, demonstrated by E
UCLID , would for ever retain their
certainty and evidence.
Matters of fact, which are the second objects of human reason, are not ascertained in
the same manner; nor is our evidence of their truth, however great, of a like nature with
the foregoing. The contrary of every matter of fact is still possible; because it can never
imply a contradiction, and is conceived by the mind with the same facility and distinct-ness, as if ever so conformable to reality. That the sun will not rise to-morrow is no less
intelligible a proposition, and implies no more contradiction, than the af ﬁrmation, that it
will rise . We should in vain, therefore, attempt to demonstrate its falsehood. Were it
52For references to other relevant authors, see the introduction to this paper.
53A similar point can be made about other Humean “principles ”. Hume famously commented in a 1751 let-
ter to Gilbert Elliot ( HLi 158) that “The philosophical Principles are the same in both ”theTreatise and
theEnquiry . Often this is presumed to imply that any “principle ”identi ﬁed as fundamental to the Trea-
tise(e.g. the Separability Principle) can accordingly be extrapolated to the Enquiry , even if it is absent
from, or plays little role in, the later work. But the fundamental “principles ”uppermost in Hume ’s mind
when writing the letter will have been, of course, the principles that he continued to view as fundamental,
and therefore retained in the Enquiry , rather than any that he had discarded. It is perfectly true that the
fundamental —and prominent —principles of the Enquiry were already present in the Treatise . But it is
very doubtful that all of the most prominent principles in the Treatise are retained in the Enquiry .
54Geometry ’s placement within the category of relations of ideas represents a well-known and striking dif-
ference from the Treatise (cf.T1.3.1.4 as quoted near the beginning of §3 above), but we can leave that
issue aside here.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 27demonstratively false, it would imply a contradiction, and could never be distinctly con-
ceived by the mind. ( E4.1–2)
This distinction between relations of ideas andmatters of fact has become widely known,
in the wake of Antony Flew ’s book of 1961 (p. 53), as “Hume ’s Fork ”. Hume ’s termi-
nology here contrasts with that of the Treatise , in that although “relations of ideas ”had
already appeared with a similar usage in Treatise Book 3 (at T3.1.1.9 and 3.2.2.20), in
Books 1 and 2 the term had invariably signi ﬁed a psychological associational relation,55
except when explicitly quali ﬁed (“relations of ideas, consider ’d as such ”atT1.3.6.6 and
“abstract relations of ideas ”atT2.3.10.11).56The term “matter of fact ”is more familiar,
occurring repeatedly —often in the Enquiry sense—in both Treatise Book 1 (published in
January 1739) and the Abstract (March 1740).57But it is not until the ﬁrst section of
Book 3 (October/November 1740) that we see a clear anticipation of Hume ’s Fork using
the term:
Reason is the discovery of truth or falshood. Truth or falshood consists in an agreement
or disagreement either to the real relations of ideas, or to real existence and matter of fact.(T3.1.1.9)
AtT3.1.1.18 –19, Hume follows this up by saying that “the operations of human under-
standing divide themselves into two kinds, the comparing of ideas, and the inferring of
matter of fact ”, and then reminds us that the former “degree of evidence ”is con ﬁned“to
those four relations ”that are constant. Thus although his Fork is clearly anticipated, and
in very similar language, it is still ﬁrmly linked with his Dichotomy. Only in the Enquiry
is this link dropped.
Hume ’s Fork can easily be illustrated with some typical examples, of which four are
his own:
However the distinction ’s exact nature bears further examination. The two paragraphs
quoted above from E4.1–2 provide several criteria for distinguishing between the twoRelations of Ideas Matters of Fact
Pythagoras ’Theorem ( E4.1)
395=½930 (E4.1)
All bachelors are unmarried
A metre is 100 centimetresThe sun will rise tomorrow ( E4.2)
The sun will not rise tomorrow ( E4.2)
Hume ’sEnquiry was published in 1748
Oxford is on the River Thames
55See for example T1.2.5.20, 1.4.6.21, 2.1.5.5, 2.1.9.5, 2.1.10.1, and 2.2.2.6 –25. The only associative use
in Book 3 is at T3.2.3.10 n. 75.4.
56Even in Book 3 the new usage is signalled explicitly; thus T3.2.2.20 refers to “relations of ideas, which
are eternal, immutable, and universally obligatory ”. Surprisingly, given Hume ’s prominent introduction of
the term “relations of ideas ”atE4.2, its only other occurrence in the Enquiry is at E4.18, where he
talks about reasoning “concerning relations of ideas ”. In Section 12 he seems to use “the abstract
sciences ”almost equivalently (see E12.18 –19, 27, and 34; also L37), though at E5.9“the abstract
sciences ”apparently include empirical psychology.
57In Book 1, see for example T1.3.6.12, 1.3.7.2 –3, 1.3.12.23, and 1.4.2.21; in the Abstract , see A8, 14,
18, and 21.
28 PETER MILLICANcategories of proposition, criteria which Hume seems to be treating as largely coincident.
On the one hand, relations of ideas :
(Rm) include all mathematical truths;
(Rd) are “intuitively or demonstratively certain ”(i.e. they are demonstrable );58
(Ra) are discoverable “by the mere operation of thought, without dependence
on what is any where existent in the universe ”(i.e. they are a priori).59
On the other hand, matters of fact :
(Ma) “are not ascertained in the same manner ”(i.e. they are not discoverable
a priori “by the mere operation of thought ”);
(Mp) are both possibly true and possibly false (i.e. they are contingent );
(Mc) can be distinctly conceived to be true or to be false, without contradiction;
(Md) cannot be demonstrated to be true or to be false.
These last three criteria incorporate the point emphasised by Hume ’s example of the sun ris-
ing or not rising: if Pis a matter of fact in this sense, then not( P) is also a matter of fact.60
By contrast, the category of relations of ideas includes only truths, so Hume ’s distinction
does not cover the entire domain of propositions: “1+1=3”, for example, counts as nei-
ther a matter of fact nor a relation of ideas.61Given his clear initial declaration that “All the
objects of human reason or enquiry may naturally be divided into [these] two kinds ”,i t
seems therefore that Hume would discount any such proposition as being an “object of
human reason or enquiry ”altogether, presumably on the grounds of its inconceivability.
(The obvious alternative way of dealing with this issue would be to extend Hume ’s taxon-
omy by introducing a category of false relations of ideas , so as to render it complete.)
58As his terminology suggests, Hume is straightforwardly following Locke here ( Essay IV ii 1 –7), in view-
ingintuition as direct intellectual grasp of a relation of ideas (e.g. that one plus one equals two, or of a
single syllogistic step —cf. note 44 above) and demonstration as a sequence of intuitive steps (as for
example in the proof of Pythagoras ’Theorem).
59Hume is not of course saying that relations of ideas must be discoverable by a process which has no
dependence on the mental activity of the discoverer; nor is he saying that they cannot involve ideasacquired through experience (since he holds that all ideas are thus acquired). All bachelors are unmar-
ried, for example, is knowable a priori because having acquired the relevant ideas I can then know for
certain, without any empirical investigation, that it is true. So what makes a truth a priori is that it can bejustiﬁedwithout appeal to experience, by thought alone. Flew ’sDictionary of Philosophy accordingly
gives the following de ﬁnition: “An a priori proposition is one that can be known to be true, or false,
without reference to experience, except in so far as experience is necessary for understanding its terms.An a posteriori proposition can be known to be true, or false, only by reference to how, as a matter ofcontingent fact, things have been, are, or will be. ”(1979: 15). For discussion of Hume ’s notion (or
notions) of apriority, see §6.1 below.
60This is con ﬁrmed by Hume ’s general usage in the Treatise and Enquiry , where the phrase “matter of
fact”is almost always indifferent between truth and falsehood (there are obvious exceptions at E4.21:
“contrary to plain matter of fact ”, and E8.24: “that it be consistent with plain matter of fact ”). In the sec-
ondEnquiry , however, Hume ’s usage seems to change slightly, for he apparently equates “matter of fact ”
with truth at M5.15: “This is a matter of fact, con ﬁrmed by daily observation. ”;M5.44: “It appears to
be a matter of fact, that ...”; and (arguably) MApp 1.6: “where is that matter of fact, which we here call
crime ”).
61Treatise 3.1.1.9, however, carries a hint that relations of ideas can indeed be false, or at least, not “real”:
“Truth or falshood consists in an agreement or disagreement either to the realrelations of ideas ...”(em-
phasis in original).
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 29Hume ’s text gives greatest prominence to the criteria based on demonstrability and
apriority, and it is fairly easy to explain why he takes these to coincide. Assuming (as he
apparently does) that intuition or demonstration count as methods of discovery “by the
mere operation of thought ”, any proposition satisfying (Rd) must also satisfy (Ra). More-
over he seems to consider intuition and demonstration to be the only such methods of a
priori discovery —that being so, any proposition satisfying (Ra) must also satisfy (Rd),
and hence the two criteria are equivalent. But then since it is clear from the wording of
(Ma) and (Md) that they are intended to be mutually exclusive with (Ra) and (Rd)
respectively, it follows that (Md) and (Ma) must also be equivalent, as long as the overall
domain of “objects of human reason or enquiry ”is the same in both cases.
So far, then, we have (Ra) and (Rd) as equivalent (as likewise (Ma) and (Md), their
complements within the appropriate domain), while the following passages con ﬁrm that
these criteria are indeed intended to apply to all, and only, relations of ideas:
Propositions of this kind [ Relations of Ideas ] are discoverable by the mere operation of
thought, without dependence on what is any where existent in the universe. ( E4.1)
Of the ﬁrst kind [ Relations of Ideas ] are ...in short, every af ﬁrmation, which is either
intuitively or demonstratively certain. ( E4.1)
The former says that all relations of ideas satisfy (Ra); the latter says that anything satis-
fying (Rd) is a relation of ideas. The ellipsis here also introduces our remaining criterion
for a relation of ideas, (Rm):
Of the ﬁrst kind [ Relations of Ideas ] are the sciences of Geometry, Algebra, and Arith-
metic ...(E4.1)
Hume seems to be asserting that all mathematical truths count as relations of ideas, but
there is no indication yet that he sees relations of ideas as being entirely con ﬁned to
mathematics. Something like this claim does indeed come later, at E12.27, on the basis
that only in mathematics are our ideas suf ﬁciently clear and precise to allow the reliable
exploration of “intricate and involved ”relationships between them. Thus any con ﬁnement
of relations of ideas to mathematics is a consequence of our conceptual limitations, rather
than a matter of de ﬁnition. Indeed in the same paragraph, Hume seems to acknowledge
that there can be trivial relations of ideas outside mathematics: with a sly dig at Locke
(Essay IV iii 18), he cites the example “that where there is no property, there can be no
injustice ”, taking injustice to be by de ﬁnition a violation of property. So there is no pro-
hibition in principle on relations of ideas outside mathematics, and indeed the huge and
fruitful developments in formal (and especially computational) systems since Hume ’s day
have demonstrated that there is far more scope for these than he envisaged.62From now
62We might also view relations of ideas as extending well beyond precise formal systems, to include at
least some propositions in philosophy and similar disciplines. Hume himself usually describes philosophyas part of the empirical science of human nature, and it is a shame that he did not consider this questionmore critically when categorising “the proper subjects of science and enquiry ”(E12.26). Despite his
long-held presumption that useful demonstration is con ﬁned to mathematics —associated as we have seen
with his problematic theory of relations —he would surely have realised, on re ﬂection, that some of his
philosophical results must count as relations of ideas (for instance, his statements at T1.3.3.4 –8 that cer-
tain would-be demonstrative proofs of the Causal Maxim are fallacious).
30 PETER MILLICANon, therefore, we can put criterion (Rm) to one side, and acknowledge that relations of
ideas will have a wider scope than Hume himself realised.
Having covered the three criteria for relations of ideas, let us move on to the remain-
ing criteria for matters of fact, starting with (Mp) and Hume ’s statement:
The contrary of every matter of fact is still possible ...(E4.2)
Here the context makes clear that Hume is thinking of the contrary of a true matter of
fact as being possible (albeit in fact false); and he is obviously taking for granted that the
matter of fact itself —being true —isipso facto possible. The upshot is that whenever Pis
a matter of fact, both Pand not( P) are possible; so any matter of fact must satisfy crite-
rion (Mp). The implication in the other direction —speciﬁcally from (Mp) to (Md) —can
also quickly be inferred from the text of E4.1–2, given Hume ’s acceptance of the Con-
ceivability Principle or, more crudely, that anything implying a contradiction is impossi-
ble.63As a ﬁrst step in this reasoning, the following sentence takes us from
demonstrative falsehood to impossibility:
Were [a proposition] demonstratively false, it would imply a contradiction ...(E4.2)
This link between demonstrability and impossibility of the contrary is also stated more
directly elsewhere, for example:64
wherever a demonstration takes place, the contrary is impossible, and implies a contradic-
tion. ( A11)
Now any relation of ideas P, by criterion (Rd), must be demonstrable, and as we have
now seen, this implies that P’s falsehood is impossible, and hence that Pviolates crite-
rion (Mp). Contrapositively, therefore, any “object of human reason or enquiry ”that sat-
isﬁes (Mp) cannot be a relation of ideas, and hence must be a matter of fact. (Mp) thus
joins (Ma) and (Md) as a necessary and suf ﬁcient criterion for a matter of fact —Hume
apparently takes all three to be equivalent.
The situation with the conceivability criterion, (Mc), however, is more delicate. Even
inE4.2 alone, we have three passages to consider, which we shall take in order:
The contrary of every matter of fact is still possible; because it can never imply a contra-
diction, and is conceived by the mind with the same facility and distinctness, as if ever
so conformable to reality.
This seems to be saying that where Pis any matter of fact which (as above) is presumed
true and therefore possible, the conceivability without contradiction of not( P) implies that
63Hume normally takes it absolutely for granted that a literal contradiction is impossible, e.g. T1.1.7.4,
1.2.2.2, 1.2.2.4, 1.4.2.3 etc., but he does occasionally spell this out, e.g. T1.3.6.1, 1.3.9.10, A11,D
2.12. Beyond the early sections of Treatise Book 1, Hume often uses the word “contradiction ”less liter-
ally, as meaning an absurdity or con ﬂict (e.g. “a new ...contradiction in our reason ”,T1.3.13.12; “any
contradiction ...to the sentiments ”, 1.4.2.37; “the contradiction betwixt ...the imagination and passion ”,
2.2.2.24).
64For other relevant passages, see T1.2.2.10, 1.3.3.3, 1.3.6.5, 1.3.9.10, 1.3.14.13; and A18.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 31it too is possible. Hence anything that satis ﬁes criterion (Mc) must also satisfy criterion
(Mp).
That the sun will not rise to-morrow is no less intelligible a proposition, and implies no
more contradiction, than the af ﬁrmation, that it will rise . We should in vain, therefore,
attempt to demonstrate its falsehood.
Here not( P)’s“intelligibility ”—which the context indicates is a mere variation for “con-
ceivability ”—without contradiction implies that it cannot be demonstrated to be false.
Clearly P, which is equally intelligible, cannot be demonstrated to be false either, and it
follows that satisfaction of criterion (Mc) implies satisfaction of (Md).
Were it demonstratively false, it would imply a contradiction, and could never be dis-
tinctly conceived by the mind.
In other words, if not( P) could be demonstrated to be false, then it could not be distinctly
conceived without contradiction. This shows that violation of criterion (Md) implies vio-
lation of (Mc), and hence again that satisfaction of (Mc) implies satisfaction of (Md).
The upshot of all these three passages is therefore exactly the same, namely, that (Mc) is
a sufﬁcient criterion for a matter of fact, by implying either (Mp) or (Md).
It is far from clear, however, that (Mc) is intended by Hume to be a necessary crite-
rion for a matter of fact —at least, nothing in the passages above implies this. The ﬁrst of
them, admittedly, gives some appearance of doing so:
The contrary of every matter of fact is still possible; because it can never imply a contra-
diction, and is conceived by the mind with the same facility and distinctness, as if ever
so conformable to reality.
This plainly indicates that (Mp) —possibility of both a proposition and its contrary —applies
tothe entire category of matters of fact . But it is not saying that (Mc) —distinct conceivabil-
ity—likewise applies to the entire category. For it does not state that the contrary of every
matter of fact is distinctly conceivable ; instead, it states that the contrary of every true mat-
ter of fact is as distinctly conceivable as if that contrary were true . So Hume ’s idea seems
to be that the conceivability of any matter of fact is independent of its truth or falsehood .
This does not require that every matter of fact should be conceivable, and indeed nothing
else in our discussion so far implies that (Mc) should extend to the entire category. For all
that we have seen, therefore, it might be that Hume is prepared to countenance matters of
fact whose truth and falsehood are each inconceivable (though nevertheless possible). This
uncertainty gives us good reason for analysing (Mc) further, to distinguish:
(Mcd) Pcan be distinctly conceived to be true or to be false;
(Mcc) Neither P’s truth, nor its falsehood, implies a contradiction.
Hume clearly takes any contradiction to be impossible by de ﬁnition (cf. note 63 above),
and since he insists (repeatedly, as we shall see in §5 below) that distinct conceivability
implies possibility, it follows that satisfaction of (Mcd) guarantees satisfaction of (Mcc).
Indeed he explicitly asserts both this implication and its contrapositive:
32 PETER MILLICAN’Tis in vain to search for a contradiction in any thing that is distinctly conceiv ’d by the
mind. Did it imply any contradiction, ’tis impossible it cou ’d ever be conceiv ’d.
(T1.2.4.11)
What is demonstratively false implies a contradiction; and what implies a contradiction
cannot be conceived. ( A18)
Less obviously, Hume seems to believe that a proposition can be impossible (if and) only
ifit implies a contradiction. This is at least strongly suggested by the quotation above,
“The contrary of every matter of fact is still possible; because it can never imply a con-
tradiction ”, and also by other texts:
Here then is an idea of extension, which ...implies no contradiction: consequently ’tis
possible for extension to exist conformable to it ...(T1.2.2.9; cf. also 1.4.2.40)
wherever a demonstration takes place, the contrary is impossible, and implies a contradic-
tion. ( A11)
It seems, therefore, that Hume takes (Mcc) to be equivalent to (Mp) —and hence also to
the other criteria considered earlier. But (Mcd) is potentially a distinctive (and stronger)
criterion for a matter of fact, implying (Mcc) and the other criteria but perhaps not
implied by them.
To summarise, then, Hume ’s Fork boils down to the following principles. Every
potentially true proposition is either a relation of ideas or a matter of fact .Relations of
ideas—which include mathematical truths —are all a priori anddemonstrable (i.e. “intu-
itively or demonstratively certain ”), meaning that their denial implies a contradiction and
cannot be distinctly conceived. Matters of fact , on the other hand, are never a priori nor
demonstrable , but are always contingent (i.e. possibly true and possibly false), with nei-
ther their truth nor falsehood implying a contradiction. But it remains to be seen whether
all matters of fact are distinctly conceivable, with no texts so far decisive either way.
5. Conceivability, Inconceivability, and Possibility
Hume explicitly states, on numerous occasions, that conceivability implies possibility, a
claim now generally known as his Conceivability Principle . We have already seen sev-
eral examples of such statements in §4 above, and here are some others:
’Tis an establish ’d maxim in metaphysics, That whatever the mind clearly conceives
includes the idea of possible existence , or, in other words, that nothing we imagine is
absolutely impossible . We can form the idea of a golden mountain, and from thence con-
clude that such a mountain may actually exist. We can form no idea of a mountain with-
out a valley, and therefore regard it as impossible. ( T1.2.2.8)
Whatever can be conceiv ’d by a clear and distinct idea necessarily implies the possibility
of existence ...(T1.2.4.11)
To form a clear idea of any thing, is an undeniable argument for its possibility, and is
alone a refutation of any pretended demonstration against it. ( T1.3.6.5)
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 33Whatever is clearly conceiv ’d may exist; and whatever is clearly conceiv ’d, after any
manner, may exist after the same manner. ...whatever we conceive is possible ...’tis
an evident principle, that whatever we can imagine, is possible .(T1.4.5.5, 10, 35)
The importance of the principle for Hume can be illustrated by the very wide range of
examples to which he applies it. He is apparently quite happy to infer from conceivability
to possibility in respect of the existence of a golden mountain ( T1.2.2.8), real extension
consisting of indivisible parts ( T1.2.2.9), the impact of billiard balls and other objects
(T1.3.9.10, A11,E4.10), the loss of activity of matter or spirit ( T1.4.5.35), the rising
or non-rising of the sun ( E4.2), the behaviour of trees in winter and summer ( E4.18),
the non-existence of various beings ( E12.28), and matter ’s having an inherent principle
of order or motion ( D2.14, 8.4). More generally, he insists on the conceivability of any
object whatever coming into existence without a cause ( T1.3.3.3), and extends the Prin-
ciple to every cause and effect relationship:65
Any thing may produce any thing. Creation, annihilation, motion, reason, volition; all
these may arise from one another, or from any other object we can imagine. ( T1.3.15.1,
cf. 1.4.5.30, 1.4.5.32)
The mind can always conceive any effect to follow from any cause, and indeed any event
to follow upon another: whatever we conceive is possible, at least in a metaphysical sense
...(A11, cf. E12.28 –9)
This last quotation usefully reminds us that the principle is intended only to reveal possibil-
ity“in a metaphysical sense ”—what is often referred to as absolute ,conceptual ,o rbroad
logical possibility —rather than physical orcausal possibility. Hume recognises both
notions, and there is real potential for confusion here, because his references to “possibility ”
are most often to absolute possibility, whereas his references to “necessity ”(especially in
the parts of his works that concern his philosophy of induction and causation) are most
often to causal necessity.66In what follows, however, I shall invariably use these modal
terms in an absolute sense, unless explicitly quali ﬁed.
Hume refers to the Conceivability Principle as “an establish ’d maxim in metaphysics ”,
and indeed it appears explicitly in the work of Descartes and Berkeley (amongst others),
65Kail (2007: 96) claims that Hume “must ”limit the application of his Conceivability Principle to “sensory
experiences or impressions ”, on the ground that only impressions have the “adequacy ”that would allow
an inference to be made from something ’s appearance to its real modal structure. The host of examples
listed here (as in Millican 2009: 681) shows clearly that Kail ’s interpretation cannot be right, and indeed
suggests that Hume would deny any absolute modal structure to things beyond what is revealed by hisConceivability Principle. See also note 76 below.
66Hence it can seem that the standard equivalence between possibly (not(P)) and not(necessarily (P)) fails
for Hume. In fact it does not, as his arguments show (e.g. T1.3.3.3 and 1.3.7.3 in the case of absolute
modality; T1.3.6.14, 2.2.2.27, and E8.4 in the case of causal modality). The two types of modality
can often be mixed, as when we pursue the (absolute) logical implications of what we take to be (cau-
sally) necessary laws. Perhaps the most explicit example of this in Hume ’s work is his discussion of
applied mathematics at E4.13, mentioned in §3 above. There are also many cases where he clearly
denies the possibility of forming certain kinds of idea, based on the logical implications of the Copy
Principle, which he argues for ( T1.1.1.8 –9,E2.6–7) as a matter of fact: a causal rather than absolute
necessity about the human mind; see for instance T1.2.6.8, 1.3.14.6, 1.3.14.22, 1.4.5.19 –21, 1.4.6.2,
and E7.8. More controversial is his dismissal of the (causal) possibility of miracles at E10.27—see
Millican (2011: §§10, 15).
34 PETER MILLICANand at least implicitly in Locke.67The appeal of the principle is obvious enough, espe-
cially on an imagist view of thinking, since conceiving or imagining a state of affairs is
then equated with “picturing it ”in the mind, and only what is possible —it seems plausi-
ble to say —can be clearly and distinctly depicted. For example it is impossible to “pic-
ture”a triangle with four sides, or a mountain (i.e. an upward slope) without a valley
(i.e. a downward slope).68It might be objected that pictures have been created of “impos-
sible objects ”, such as Maurits Escher ’s famous staircase which seems to go forever
upwards whilst returning to the same place. But these are evidently not “clear and dis-
tinct”depictions, because they represent what purport to be three-dimensional objects
through a two-dimensional projection. If an architect proposed to erect such a structureon the basis of an Escher print, he might reasonably be asked to depict it more clearly
and distinctly, by means of a series of diagrams in different orientations (from above, the
front, the sides etc.) which by focusing on complementary two-dimensional “views ”
would be able to represent each of them clearly and —as Locke would say —more “ade-
quately ”. Indeed such examples can thus be used to argue in favour of the Conceivability
Principle, by raising the pertinent question: how else might we conclude that some archi-
tectural design was conceptually possible, if not by such precise depiction? Isn ’t that
exactly how we would go about establishing the modal difference between an Escher
staircase (where the effort at such depiction would inevitably fail) and a normal staircase
(where it could succeed)?
69
Not surprisingly, the most common objections to the Conceivability Principle arise
where imagist depiction is out of the question, such as in the famous example of Gold-
bach’s Conjecture:
Every even number greater than 2 can be expressed as the sum of two prime numbers.
We do not (currently) know whether this conjecture is true or false —every even number so
far tested conforms to it, but no general proof has been discovered (it might even be that the
conjecture is in fact true, and yet that no proof is possible). We can apparently conceive
what it would be for Goldbach ’s Conjecture to be true, and also what it would be for the
conjecture to be false. But since it is an arithmetical statement, it must, if true, be necessar-
ily true or else, if false, necessarily false . (For example, that 24 is the sum of 17 and 7, and
that 17 and 7 are primes, are not just contingent facts about the way the world happens to
67Descartes: “It must be noted that possible existence is contained in the concept or idea of everything that
we clearly and distinctly understand. ”(First Set of Replies , CSM ii 83); Berkeley: “my conceiving or
imagining power does not extend beyond the possibility of real existence or perception ”(Principles i 5);
Locke: “there is no necessary connexion between Space and Solidity , since we can conceive the one
without the other ”(Essay II xiii 22). At T1.2.2.8, Hume seems to be borrowing phraseology from Des-
cartes, and perhaps from Berkeley also.
68Descartes repeatedly uses a mountain without a valley as an example of a self-contradictory and thereforeimpossible object, for example in the Fifth Meditation , CSM ii 46.
69It is pertinent to ask whyan impossible situation can easily be described in words, but not easily depicted
visually. I suspect the answer is that we would not accept as adequate any visual depiction that was insuf-
ﬁciently clear and explicit, or which purported to represent anything that was not itself visual in nature.
Theﬁrst condition would rule out Escher staircases etc., while the second would rule out diagrammatic
representations of contradictory situations. But then, given a clear depiction of a visual situation, the
isomorphic structure of the image and the situation depicted (e.g. their spatial topology) would make it
impossible for an adequate image to be produced of an impossibility. No such isomorphic structure gets in
the way of a clear and explicit verbal description of an impossibility (e.g. “triangle ABC, lying in a
Euclidean plane, has one side that is longer than the sum of the other two sides ”).
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 35be.) So either Goldbach ’s Conjecture could not possibly be false, or else it could not possi-
bly be true —either way, since we can apparently conceive of both eventualities, it seems
we must allow that conceivability does not always imply possibility.
It is not clear, however, that this argument explodes Hume ’s Conceivability Principle,
even as applied to mathematical conceptualisation. For he could point out that there is a
distinction between on the one hand, conceiving in the weak sense of merely understand-
ing what some proposition means , and on the other hand, conceiving in the stronger sense
ofunderstanding clearly and distinctly what it would be for that proposition to be true —
only the latter, he might say, requires that one has grasped a genuine possibility. Thus the
mathematical dunce can “conceive ”in the ﬁrst sense that 17 +7=26, but this doesn ’t
show that 17 +7=26 is a genuine possibility, because the dunce ’s conception is con-
fused. (Moreover if he tried to depict the statement clearly and distinctly in a diagram,
with one-to-one mappings between 17 +7 dots on the left, say, and 26 dots on the right,
then he would fail.) Likewise, it might be argued, we can only conceive in the weak sense
what it would be for Goldbach ’s Conjecture to be true or false, since we can ’t conceive
clearly and distinctly of its truth —quite obviously given its in ﬁnite nature —until we have
found a proof, or of its falsehood until we have found a counterexample (i.e. an even
number greater than 2 which cannot be expressed as the sum of two primes). Thus only
after we have achieved the means of establishing its truth or falsehood will we be able to
grasp such a mathematical conjecture suf ﬁciently clearly to “see”its modal status. This
answer may or may not be satisfactory in this particular (and notoriously dif ﬁcult) case,
but at any rate Hume never applies his argument from conceivability to such problematic
mathematical examples. Instead he con ﬁnes his attention to relatively straightforward
cases where it is far more plausible to claim that we can understand suf ﬁciently clearly
what it would be for the proposition in question to be true. That the sun will not rise
tomorrow ,o rthat there is a golden mountain , for example, do seem to be understandable
in something like the stronger sense outlined above. It is therefore perhaps quite reason-
able to insist that they are clearly and visibly contingent (a phrase borrowed from Roger
Woolhouse 1972: 150), and hence must be genuine conceptual possibilities. Again, as
with the impossible objects, Hume could also try to turn the tables on his critics by askinghow else—other than through the attempt to conceive clearly and distinctly the envisaged
scenario—might one go about establishing a conceptual possibility? Suppose we produce
a series of convincing diagrams of a golden mountain, with carefully co-ordinated projec-
tions from different angles. Better still, suppose we create a three-dimensional model of
such a mountain, or simply imagine a particular existing mountain with its entire bulk
replaced by gold. Of course such a golden mountain might be physically impossible (gold
might well be too malleable to support such a mass), but any suggestion that it was con-
ceptually impossible —in the face of such clear depiction —might threaten widespread gen-
eral scepticism about conceptual possibility: if thisdoesn ’t show a non-actual physical
situation to be conceptually possible, then what could show it?70Our attempts at clear and
70Such scepticism —especially about this sort of example —would not necessarily be inappropriate, though
it would be non-Humean. A plausible case can be made for the view that our general understanding offundamental particles and the physical laws that govern them enters into our conception of what a sub-
stance like gold is(e.g. that it consists of atoms with 79 protons in the nucleus), and hence that gold can-
not coherently be conceived to act in ways contrary to those concepts and laws. This line of argumentnarrows the gap between physical and conceptual possibility, and takes us close to the discussion of §6.3
below.
36 PETER MILLICANdistinct depiction in the imagination (supplemented perhaps by physical pictures and mod-
els) might well be fallible, but is it not better to rely on these than to abandon entirely the
attempt to understand the range and limits of absolute possibility?
Hume ’s use of the Conceivability Principle can, then, plausibly be given at least some
initial defence (and there is no space here for going deeper into these philosophical
issues),71but the lesson of Goldbach ’s Conjecture remains: Hume ought to be prepared
to accept that there are some propositions Pwhere neither Pnornot(P) is conceivable in
the sense that he takes to imply real possibility. But then, given our ignorance of whether
such propositions are (necessarily) true or (necessarily) false, he should not hold that
such lack of conceivability implies anything either way about their modal status. Hence
in particular he should deny the so-called Inconceivability Principle , that inconceivability
implies impossibility , and should accordingly accept that there can be propositions which,
though inconceivable to us, are nevertheless possible. This brings us back to the question
highlighted at the end of the previous section: is Hume really prepared to countenance
matters of fact that are notdistinctly conceivable?
Fortunately for this defence of Hume ’s position, his texts clearly indicate that he does
indeed reject the Inconceivability Principle, and is prepared to countenance matters of
fact that are not distinctly conceivable.72Perhaps the most obvious evidence here is that
while he explicitly states the Conceivability Principle numerous times (many of which
we have noted above), he never explicitly states anything like the Inconceivability Princi-
ple, except as limited to the special case where our ideas are “adequate ”.73Likewise, in
our analysis above, we have examined carefully the key texts on Hume ’s Fork, and
found that not one of them carries any implication from (Mcd) —P’s being a matter of
fact—to (Mcc): the distinct conceivability of both Pandnot(P) . This uniformity of tex-
tual evidence would be extremely surprising if in fact Hume accepted the Inconceivabil-
ity Principle. The nearest he ever gets to a general endorsement of it is in the ﬁnal
sentence of each of the following two passages, the ﬁrst of which we have already seen:
’Tis an establish ’d maxim in metaphysics, That whatever the mind clearly conceives
includes the idea of possible existence , or, in other words, that nothing we imagine is
absolutely impossible . We can form the idea of a golden mountain, and from thence con-
clude that such a mountain may actually exist. We can form no idea of a mountain with-
out a valley, and therefore regard it as impossible. ( T1.2.2.8)
Nothing, at ﬁrst view, may seem more unbounded than the thought of man, which ...is
not even restrained within the limits of nature and reality. To form monsters, and join
incongruous shapes and appearances, costs the imagination no more trouble than to con-ceive the most natural and familiar objects ...What never was seen, or heard of, may yet
be conceived; nor is any thing beyond the power of thought, except what implies an
absolute contradiction. ( E2.4)
71Much has been said —and is still being added even today —on the philosophy of the Conceivability Prin-
ciple, which is the subject of the useful collection by Gendler and Hawthorne (2002). In their Introduc-tion at pp. 13 –26, the editors discuss the ancestry of the principle in Descartes and Hume, and at pp. 55 –
67 they provide a helpful summary of the papers in the volume.
72In the discussion to follow, I shall be generally agreeing with many points made by Tycerium Lightner
(1997).
73The exception, to be discussed below, is at T1.2.2.1.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 37But this evidence is extremely weak. In the Treatise passage, Hume is clearly stating and
illustrating his Conceivability Principle, which he emphasises in italics before giving two
examples, one positive and one negative. The illustration would obviously be incomplete
without a negative example, so Hume provides one from the standard repertoire of famil-
iar impossibilities: a mountain (i.e. a slope up) without a valley (i.e. a slope down). This
is conveniently uncontroversial because it clearly implies a contradiction, but for that
very reason it fails to give any strong indication that inconceivability by itself would
entail impossibility (and indeed we have already seen, at the end of §4, evidence that
Hume would take this to follow only if a contradiction were implied). The ﬁnal sentence
of the Enquiry passage, likewise, does little to support the Inconceivability Principle
when seen in context. Here the crucial passages are the ﬁrst clause —“Nothing, atﬁrst
view, may seem more unbounded than the thought of man ...”—and the initial sentence
of the very next paragraph, immediately following the quoted passage:
But though our thought seems to possess this unbounded liberty, we shall ﬁnd, upon a
nearer examination, that it is really con ﬁned within very narrow limits, and that all this
creative power of the mind amounts to no more than the faculty of compounding, trans-posing, augmenting, or diminishing the materials afforded us by the senses and experi-
ence. ( E2.5)
In other words, the appearance of unbounded conceivability is misleading, and our
thought is actually narrowly con ﬁned to the ideas that are copied from our experienced
impressions. So far from supporting the Inconceivability Principle, therefore, this passage
very strongly suggests that Hume cannot accept it.74Consistently with this, he soon goes
on to point out that there are in fact likely to be ideas that are conceived by other beings,
but inconceivable by us:
A blind man can form no notion of colours; a deaf man of sounds. ...A man of mild
manners can form no idea of inveterate revenge or cruelty; nor can a sel ﬁsh heart easily
conceive the heights of friendship and generosity. It is readily allowed, that other beings
may possess many senses of which we can have no conception; because the ideas of
them have never been introduced to us, in the only manner, by which an idea can haveaccess to the mind, to wit, by the actual feeling and sensation. ( E2.7)
The most familiar example of such an alternative sense, much discussed since Thomas
Nagel ’s famous paper of 1974, would be auditory sonar, which bats apparently experi-
ence but to us seems (phenomenologically at least) utterly unimaginable.
More philosophically substantial cases of inconceivable possibilities come in Hume ’s
discussions of the vacuum and of the external world. Regarding the former he says:
74The passage leaves open whether our “faculty of compounding ”(etc.) ideas might be unlimited. Later in
theEnquiry Hume appears to resolve this issue: “Nothing is more free than the imagination of man; ...
it has unlimited power of mixing, compounding, separating, and dividing ...ideas, in all the varieties of
ﬁction and vision. ”(E5.10). The context, however, suggests some hyperbole, as this is the introductory
paragraph to Part 2 of Section 5, designed to motivate the claim that there is an important difference
between ﬁction andbelief . The main point Hume seems to be making is that we can create ﬁctions at
will, whereas “weﬁnd by daily experience ”that the mind is very far from being “able to believe what-
ever it pleases ”. Elsewhere he acknowledges that ideas are often obscure and hard to keep precise (e.g. T
1.2.3.1, A7,E7.4), which suggests that there are practical limits on our ability to manipulate them.
38 PETER MILLICAN’tis impossible to conceive either a vacuum and extension without matter, or a time, when
there was no succession or change in any real existence. ( T1.2.4.2, cf. 1.2.5.1)
However he does not proceed to infer impossibility from such inability to conceive.
Admittedly this discussion on space and time in Book 1 of the Treatise is notoriously
obscure, but in a footnote added in the Appendix he is more forthcoming:
If we carry our enquiry beyond the appearances of objects to the senses, I am afraid, that
most of our conclusions will be full of scepticism and uncertainty. Thus if it be ask ’d,
whether or not the invisible and intangible distance be always full of body, or of some-
thing that by an improvement of our organs might become visible or tangible, I mustacknowledge, that I ﬁnd no very decisive arguments on either side; tho ’I am inclin ’dt o
the contrary opinion, as being more suitable to vulgar and popular notions. If the Newto-
nian philosophy be rightly understood ...Nothing is more suitable to that philosophy,
than a modest scepticism to a certain degree, and a fair confession of ignorance in sub-jects, that exceed all human capacity. ( T1.2.5.26 n. 12)
The case of the external world seems a bit clearer. Here Hume says repeatedly and forth-
rightly that our thoughts are limited by the ideas derived from our impressions, for example:
We suppose external objects to resemble internal perceptions. ...[The imagination] bor-
rows all its ideas from some precedent perceptions . We never can conceive any thing but
perceptions, and therefore must make every thing resemble them. ( T1.4.2.54)
Philosophers [who favour a representative theory of perception] arbitrarily invent a new set
of perceptions [as the supposed external objects] ...I say, a new set of perceptions: For we
may well suppose in general, but ’tis impossible for us distinctly to conceive, objects to be
in their nature any thing but exactly the same with perceptions. ( T1.4.2.56)
We cannot conceive of anything “speciﬁcally different ”from our perceptions ( T1.2.6.8 –
9, 1.4.2.2), but Hume does not appeal to such inconceivability to conclude that no such
external objects exist. It is true that our attempts to imagine such objects are riddled withconfusion, from conundrums about their identity to the impossibility of conceiving their
primary qualities as independent of our secondary quality impressions. But despite all
this, their existence remains a real possibility:
It is a question of fact, whether the perceptions of the senses be produced by external
objects, resembling them ...(E12.12)
Hence again, apparently, inconceivability does not imply impossibility.75
As mentioned earlier, Hume does appear to accept the Inconceivability Principle
within the limited domain of “adequate ”ideas:
75Unfortunately there is no such clear statement to this effect in the Treatise , so as with the vacuum, there
remains some room for doubt as to whether Hume changed his mind on external objects after publishingBook 1. However earlier in the Treatise ,a tT1.3.14.36, Hume states as a corollary to his de ﬁnitions of
cause “that we can never have reason to believe that any object exists, of which we cannot form an
idea”. As Lightner observes, “This is signi ﬁcantly weaker than saying that inconceivable objects are
impossible. If Hume did think that inconceivable objects were impossible, then it is odd that he wouldbother making this weaker statement about them. ”(1997: 124).
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 39Wherever ideas are adequate representations of objects, the relations, contradictions and
agreements of the ideas are all applicable to the objects ...The plain consequence is, that
whatever appears impossible and contradictory upon the comparison of these ideas, must
bereally impossible and contradictory, without any farther excuse or evasion. ( T1.2.2.1)
This passage has featured in the New Hume debate, after Peter Kail interpreted it as lim-
iting the Conceivability Principle to adequate ideas. But this is a mistake, and the implied
limitation is to the Inconceivability Principle.76Hume is saying that where ideas are ade-
quate, the “contradictions and agreements ”of those ideas —that is, the necessary implica-
tions (either negative or positive) between them —also apply to the objects. Thus
impossibilities andnecessities amongst adequate ideas (but presumably not amongst ideas
in general) can legitimately be transferred to the objects.77Possibilities , it seems, can
make this transfer, in accordance with Hume ’s Conceivability Principle, without any such
limitation. Another passage in a similar spirit is at T1.4.5.20, where Hume says that
“any conclusion we form concerning the connexion and repugnance of impressions ”can-
not reliably be transferred to the objects, whereas “whatever conclusions of this kind we
form concerning objects, will most certainly be applicable to impressions ”. Thus valid
inferential connexions and “repugnancies ”go reliably from the realm of objects to the
realm of perceptions but —and Hume twice emphasises this within the paragraph —they
do not go reliably in the other direction. Now if such necessary relations pass in one
direction, then possible relations must pass in the other.78So Hume is in effect asserting
that the Conceivability Principle applies within this context, and denying that the Incon-
ceivability Principle applies there.
Presenting so much textual evidence —all pointing in the same direction —might
well seem excessive, were it not that in a recent Mind article, Thomas Holden argues
vigorously that Hume does in fact accept the Inconceivability Principle. The new idea
he brings to this debate is that Hume is committed to “an expressivist account of
absolute necessity ”(2014: 379), based on a notorious passage in the Treatise which
76See Kail (2003), especially pp. 49 –50, and (2007a: 94 –8); and for criticism, Millican (2007b: §3.3) and
(2009: §6). The “New Hume ”interpretation standardly asserts, or at least leaves open, that Hume
believes in hidden absolute necessities that ground causal relations, so that when Acauses B,Ahas some
property that —if only we knew about it —would ground an a priori inference to B. Strawson (1989: ch.
11) calls this “the AP property ”, while Kail (2007b: 256) calls it “the reference- ﬁxer for ‘power ’”or
“RFP”. Such hidden necessities threaten to violate the Conceivability Principle, because they would
imply that some things which Hume insists we can conceive (e.g. Aoccurring without Bfollowing)
would not, in fact, be absolutely possible. Strict violation can be avoided if the hidden necessities are
only contingently related to the phenomenal Aand B(as hinted by Beebee 2006: 220), but this risks
undermining the entire point of postulating such necessities at all. Thus the New Hume interpretation
looks tenable only if Hume ’s commitment to the Conceivability Principle is less than complete, as Kail
argues. In a similar spirit, John Wright (1983: 103, 106) claims that Hume rejects the Conceivability
Principle, but he too con ﬂates it with the Inconceivability Principle, using the term “establish ’d maxim in
metaphysics ”for both (see p. 92 and his index under “metaphysics ”).
77Note here that asserting a necessary implication from PtoQis equivalent to asserting the impossibility
of (P&¬Q), so necessity and impossibility go together. Note also that even if the passage is taken to
encompass both necessities andpossibilities, it need not suggest any limitation of the Conceivability Prin-
ciple, for in that case it would simply be saying that when ideas are adequate (and presumably not other-
wise), the implications run in both directions.
78For example, if a repugnancy between PandQamongst objects implies their repugnancy also amongst
perceptions, then the possibility of ( P&Q) amongst perceptions —and hence Pand Q notbeing repug-
nant there —contrapositively implies the possibility of ( P&Q) amongst objects also.
40 PETER MILLICANsuggests that “the necessity, which makes two times two equal to four, or three
angles of a triangle equal to two right ones, lies only in the act of the understanding,
by which we consider and compare these ideas ”(T1.3.14.23). Most commentators,
myself included (2009: 675 n. 40), have seen this as something of an aberration on
Hume ’s part, or as a loose remark about the origin of our idea of mathematical
necessity, rather than about its nature. But Holden develops it into a theory which
equates absolute necessities with limitations of (idealised) human conceivability, and
which thus implies that Hume must accept both the Conceivability and Inconceivabil-
ity Principles. Holden ’s article is ingenious and interesting, but has to lean very heav-
ily on the “key text ”atT1.2.2.8 for lack of other clear textual support (pp. 388,
391–3).79And he gives a very tendentious response to Lightner ’s urging of the same
“obvious evidence ”from which my own argument started above:
Lightner (1997) ...adds that “If Hume did accept the Inconceivability Principle, one
would think that in the twenty-four or more instances of his stating or using the Conceiv-
ability Principle, he would have made clear that the inference goes both ways ”(p. 115).
But ...if Hume holds that the conceivability principle and the inconceivability principle
are equivalent (as the mind-dependent interpretation would have it, and as T 1.2.2.8 sug-
gests), then there would be no need to repeatedly state “both”principles, since they are
really one and the same. (Holden 2014: 393 n. 15)
On Holden ’s Humean theory, both the Conceivability and Inconceivability Principles
are implied by the equivalence between absolute modality and limits on human con-ceivability, but this does notmake them “really one and the same ”: there is a clear
and fundamental difference between the claim that Pimplies Qand the claim that Q
implies P, even if they have a common foundation. Moreover if Hume did mistakenly
conﬂate the two directions of implication, then it would be a remarkable coincidence —
extending over thirty or so texts —that he never states the unrestricted principle in the
“inconceivability ”direction, and never implies any restrictions in the “conceivability ”
direction.
There are also strong independent reasons for rejecting Holden ’s interpretation, of which
perhaps the most fundamental are these. First, even on his account, Hume acknowledges anobjective correlate to the mental limitations that characterise absolute necessity. Just as our
attributions of causal necessity track objective constant conjunctions, so our attributions of
absolute necessity seem to track relations that “obtain simply in virtue of the intrinsic repre-
sentational or semantic content of those ideas ”(p. 398; see also pp. 379 –80). But then such
“relations of ideas ”themselves provide an adequate basis for the metaphysics of absolute
modality: Holden ’s conceivability-dependent interpretation becomes otiose, and the passage
79T1.2.2.8 cannot bear this weight, and not only because it fails to imply a general commitment to the
Inconceivability Principle, as explained earlier. It also seems to be carelessly written, with Hume givingtwo versions of the “establish ’d maxim ”which are not apparently equivalent, one of these involving an
“idea of possible existence ”which looks extremely dubious on his own principles (e.g. T1.2.6.4, though
he might have chosen this phrase to echo Descartes, cf. note 67 above). Moreover the InconceivabilityPrinciple could not properly be described as “establish ’d”: it is never stated clearly by his most prominent
predecessors, and is probably not believed by them. Thus Descartes seems to consider the union of soul
and body to be beyond our conception (e.g. CSM iii 227 –8); Locke repeatedly stresses the limits of our
ideas (e.g. Essay II xxiii 16, 23 –32; IV iii 23 –7); while Berkeley denies that we can imagine or form an
idea of a spirit and, like Locke, acknowledges that other creatures will have ideas that we do not (e.g.Principles i 81; Dialogues 232).
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 41atT1.3.14.23 is most naturally taken to be a sketch of how we come to feel the necessity of
relations of ideas (and hence acquire modal ideas about them), rather than a claim about the
nature of that necessity.80Secondly, Holden ’s interpretation requires an account of what we
are saying when we voice statements of absolute necessity, and he himself ﬁnds absurd the
idea that such statements “justarecovert claims ...about the human mind ’s inability to
conceive ”.T oﬁll this gap, he proposes an “expressivist approach ”whereby “when we pro-
nounce that a certain proposition is absolutely necessary we are giving voice to a non-repre-
sentational attitude —most likely, the prescriptive attitude of insisting that the proposition in
question ...be treated as a non-negotiable element in our systems of belief ”(p. 403, cf. pp.
383, 406). But this looks suspiciously anachronistic; and unlike the parallel move in thecase of causal necessity (where Hume explicitly equates our impression with the making of
an inference, so that an attitudinal quasi-realism appears relatively plausible),
81there is
nothing whatever in Hume ’s texts to support it.
To sum up, then, we have found no signi ﬁcant evidence at all that Hume accepts the
Inconceivability Principle, and plenty of evidence that he rejects it, as indeed he should
if his position is to avoid refutation by examples such as Goldbach ’s Conjecture. Thus
the answer to the question raised at the end of §4—whether on Hume ’s principles, all
matters of fact are distinctly conceivable —is negative. Though distinct conceivability
remains a suf ﬁcient criterion of possibility, therefore, it is not a necessary condition, and
the two components of our original (Mc) criterion must remain separated:
(Mcd) Pcan be distinctly conceived to be true or to be false;
(Mcc) Neither P’s truth, nor its falsehood, implies a contradiction.
(Mcd) implies (Mcc) and therefore also (as discussed earlier) the other criteria —M(p),
M(a), and M(d) —which ensure that Pis a matter of fact. But (Mcd) is not implied by
(Mcc), and hence is a stronger condition than any of these other criteria.82
6. Some Problem Cases for Hume ’s Fork
We have now put together a fairly comprehensive picture of the interrelations between an
important family of Humean concepts, partially revealed in the Treatise and then perfected
in the Enquiry with the statement of Hume ’s Fork. Relations of ideas , as the name implies,
can be known a priori, simply by inspecting the nature and internal relations between ourideas, and hence they are capable of being “either intuitively or demonstratively certain ”.
Their denial implies a contradiction, and hence is impossible, so they are also necessary
80Holden (p. 398) distinguishes between the necessity of non-modal propositions (such as “Two times two
equals four ”) and the truth of modal propositions (such as “It is absolutely necessary than two times two
equals four ”), when defending Hume from the charge of psychologism. But where a proposition concerns
unchangeable relations between the content of ideas (as in arithmetic, for example), truth coincides withnecessity, and the very name that Hume gives to the category of “relations of ideas ”indicates clearly that
he recognises this point.
81See Millican (2007b: §3.5) for a sketch of this sort of quasi-realist approach to causal necessity, and §2.5
(especially note 26) for the suggestion that Hume ’s“impression of necessary connexion ”is best inter-
preted as re ﬂexive awareness of making a customary inference.
82This has the nice consequence that “conceivability ”can coherently be interpreted as actual conceivability
by a particular human. So unlike Holden, we have no need to resort to an idealised notion that raises fur-
ther dif ﬁculties of its own (not least: how are we to know whether something is ideally conceivable,
except by actually conceiving it?).
42 PETER MILLICANtruths. Since nothing that implies a contradiction can be distinctly conceived, moreover, our
inability to conceive of a proposition ’s falsehood gives (fallible) evidence that it is indeed a
relation of ideas. Matters of fact , by contrast, can be known (if at all) only a posteriori —by
consulting experience —because they do not concern just the internal relations between our
ideas, but rather how those ideas go together in the actual world. For this reason every mat-
ter of fact is contingent, there can be no internal contradiction in supposing any matter of
fact to be otherwise, and it follows that no matter of fact can be demonstrated (which would
involve showing its denial to be self-contradictory). Distinct conceivability provides a reli-
able criterion of possibility, and hence any proposition whose truth and falsehood are both
distinctly conceivable must be a matter of fact. However there are matters of fact beyondour conception, which are inconceivable to us because we lack the requisite competence,
faculties, or ideas from experience.
In stark contrast to the tensions and confusions in the initial Treatise account of rela-
tions and its associated Dichotomy, the broad lines of this picture seem clear and fairly
persuasive, and it should perhaps be no surprise that it became elevated to the status of
orthodoxy within analytic philosophy for most of the twentieth century (as, for example,
in the writings of Ayer and Flew). But although Hume ’s Fork does seem initially
straightforward, there are many propositions that are more dif ﬁcult to classify, and can
thus be seen as presenting objections to it. Some of these, as we shall see, naturally sug-
gest modest re ﬁnements or clari ﬁcations of Hume ’s logical categories; others —to which
we move in §7 below—present more of a threat to the distinction as a whole.
6.1. Current Awareness, and Hume ’s Notion of Apriority
One kind of problem case is exempli ﬁed by Descartes ’famous Cogito statement “I am think-
ing”(Meditations : CSM 18), which is tricky because although my state of thinking is to me
both certain and “discoverable by the mere operation of thought ”(which makes it seem like a
relation of ideas ), it is not a necessary truth and its falsehood implies no contradiction: I might
have been dead by now, or unconscious, or never have existed (which makes it seem like a
matter of fact ). There are also countless more speci ﬁc examples in this spirit, focusing on my
ﬁrst-personal awareness of my own “ideas ”. Some of these involve particular truths about my
current state of mind, such as the proposition that I am now thinking about the number 64, or
wishing that I were out in the sunshine. These again seem to be “discoverable by the mere
operation of thought ”, though they also seem to be knowable only through experience and
plainly contingent. Here the problem is that thinking (whether contemplating, perceiving, or
feeling) is itself a form of experience, and so in these cases, where I actively re ﬂect on my own
thinking, my thought serves both as“observed data ”
andas“intellectual judgement ”.S u c h
reﬂexivity should perhaps be recognised as a special case, for example by drawing a distinction
between two different notions of the a priori, one pure and one awareness-informed . It is inter-
esting to note, therefore, that Hume himself —in the person of Philo —hints at a very similar
distinction in his Dialogues concerning Natural Religion :
Were a man to abstract from every thing which he knows or has seen, he would be altogether
incapable, merely from his own ideas, to determine what kind of scene the universe must be, or
to give the preference to one state or situation of things above another. For as nothing, which
he clearly conceives, could be esteemed impossibl e or implying a contradiction, every chimera
of his fancy would be upon an equal footing; nor could he assign any just reason, why headheres to one idea or system, and rejects the others, which are equally possible.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 43Again; after he opens his eyes, and contemplat es the world, as it really is, it would be impos-
sible for him, at ﬁrst, to assign the cause of any one event; much less, of the whole of things or
of the universe. He might set his fancy a rambling; and she might bring him in an in ﬁnite variety
of reports and representations. These would all be possible; but being all equally possible, he
would never, of himself, give a satisfactory account for his preferring one of them to the rest.
Experience alone can point out to him the true cause of any phenomenon. ( D2.12–13)
Theﬁrst paragraph illustrates the standard pure notion of apriority, according to which a
proposition counts as a priori only if someone could know it while “abstracting from every
thing which he knows or has seen ”—that is, without appeal to any experience whatever (as-
suming that “has seen ”stands proxy for sensation in general). The second paragraph illus-
trates the more relaxed awareness-informed notion, according to which a proposition countsas a priori if it can be known without appeal to any experience beyond current awareness
(and hence without any appeal to memory as opposed to sensation or re ﬂection).
Although it is now common to recognise a range of such notions,
83clearly Hume ’s
conception of a “relation of ideas ”requires something like pure apriority, since only this
goes along with necessity (and inconceivability of the contrary). It might therefore seem
to pose an objection to his Fork that he sometimes appears to be thinking instead in
terms of what I have called awareness-informed apriority, for example:
...the knowledge of [cause and effect] is not, in any instance, attained by reasonings /C18a
priori ; but arises entirely from experience ...Let an object be presented to a man of ever
so strong natural reason and abilities; if that object be entirely new to him, he will not beable, by the most accurate examination of its sensible qualities, to discover any of itscauses or effects. ( E4.6)
In a word, then, every effect is a distinct event from its cause. It could not, therefore, be
discovered in the cause, and the ﬁrst invention or conception of it, /C18a priori , must be
entirely arbitrary. ( E4.11)
But this objection is not serious, because here Hume is concerned with inference from
observed to unobserved, asking what can (or cannot) be inferred “a priori ”from current
awareness of some “object ”(or event).84And in precisely these sorts of cases, the dis-
tinction between our two notions of apriority virtually disappears, because current sen-
sory awareness of the object is then “given ”in the premise of the inference, extending
the boundaries of “pure”apriority so that the two notions match.85We can therefore
understand Hume as fundamentally operating with the pure notion of apriority here, just
as he does when discussing the a priori limits of causation:86
83See for example Boghossian and Peacocke (2000): 2 –3.
84Other cases are at A26,E7.15 n. 13, 7.29 n. 17, 10.8 and 10.10 n. 22, but most are in Section 4 of the
Enquiry (paragraphs 6, 7, 9, 10, 11, and 13). A11 is similar, assuming that “reason ”here means some-
thing like a priori reason.
85This does not mean, of course, that Hume is prepared to take for granted our interpretation of our current
sensory awareness. Whether my bread-like sensations, for example, are genuinely caused by a nourishingfood can perfectly well be subject to doubt (cf. E4.16, 21).
86Other passages like those that follow are at T1.4.5.35, 3.1.1.24, and E12.29 n. 35. This understanding of
Hume represents a change of mind from my (2002: §4.1), which interpreted his argument concerning induc-
tion in terms of awareness-informed apriority. At the time, I took him to be operating with a perceptual view
of reason (see my 2012a: §3.2 for the corrective), and gave less weight to consistency with his Fork.
44 PETER MILLICANto consider the matter a priori , any thing may produce any thing ...(T1.4.5.30)
May I not clearly and distinctly conceive [that things ’effects may change]? Now whatever
is intelligible, and can be distinctly conceived, implies no contradiction, and can never be
proved false by any demonstrative argument or abstract reasoning /C18a priori .(E4.18)
If we reason /C18a priori , any thing may appear able to produce any thing. ( E12.29)
Nor is this picture signi ﬁcantly affected by Hume ’s occasionally speaking in a very different
manner, as when he refers to passions or behaviour that “a priori ...can reasonably be
expected ”to arise in various circumstances ( T2.2.2.6 –7, cf. 3.2.12.4). Such use of “a pri-
ori”—applying to such things as causal prediction of human reactions —is very different
from pure apriority, but he is obviously speaking loosely here, as corroborated by what he
says elsewhere about a commonly drawn distinction between “reason ”and“experience ”:
Nothing is more usual than for writers ...to distinguish between reason andexperience ,a n dt o
suppose, that these species of argumentation are entirely different from each other. The former
are taken for the mere result of our intelle ctual faculties, which, by considering /C18ap r i o r i the nature
of things, and examining the effects, that must follow from their operation, establish particular
principles of science and philosophy. The latter are supposed to be derived entirely from sense
and observation, by which we learn what has actually resulted from the operation of particular
objects, and are thence able to infer, what will, for the future, result from them. ( E5.5 n. 8)
Having explained this common usage, Hume quickly dismisses it as “erroneous, at least
super ﬁcial”. For even the principles attributed to reason in this sense are ultimately based
on experience; what distinguishes them is just that they “cannot be established without
some process of thought, and some re ﬂection on what we have observed ”. So likewise,
when Hume draws on his general knowledge of humanity to assess “a priori [what] emo-
tion ...can reasonably be expected ”in some circumstances, it is very clear that he is using
the term “a priori ”in what he knows to be a loose and “erroneous ”way. None of this con-
ﬂicts with our seeing Hume ’s“ofﬁcial”concept of apriority as essentially the same as the
conventional pure notion, which is what seems to be required for maintaining his Fork. In
this sense, accordingly, my awareness of my own existence —and of my own thoughts and
feelings—isnota priori, but lies within the domain of “matter of fact ”.87
87Houston Smit (2010) argues that Hume adopts a traditional “from-grounds ”notion of the a priori which
requires seeing why a proposition is true, “by appeal to the ground that makes it true ”(p. 314). The Art
of Thinking of 1662 (a work mentioned by Hume at A4) explains such a notion “in passing ”:“proving
effects by their causes ...is called an a priori proof [whereas] demonstrating causes by their effects ...
is called an a posteriori proof ”(Arnauld and Nicole, 1662: 233). We have already seen reason to think
that Hume would view this distinction as “erroneous, at least super ﬁcial”(E5.5 n. 8), and he would also
presumably consider it a mistake to posit a fundamental divide between reasoning from cause-to-effectand from effect-to-cause, which he classi ﬁes together (e.g. T1.3.9.12, 1.3.14.22, 1.4.4.1). But the issue is
not quite so straightforward, because Smit sees Hume as mainly using a very strong variant of the notion,
which “requires seeing the necessity with which the ground determines its consequence ”(p. 319), and as
he applies this to Hume ’s arguments, it comes to look almost indistinguishable from apriority in the mod-
ern sense. Indeed if the connections with demonstrability and impossibility of the contrary are to be
maintained, it is hard to see how the two notions can avoid coinciding (an issue Smit does not discuss).
So even if Hume was initially in ﬂuenced by a “from-grounds ”notion, I believe his mature philosophy is
best understood in terms of the modern notion, and I am not persuaded by Smit that any of Hume ’s argu-
ments require a “from-grounds ”alternative.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 456.2. The Relations of Phenomenal Ideas
Another set of problem cases for Hume ’s Fork involves general truths about the phe-
nomenal qualities of sensory “ideas ”(ideas that on Humean principles can of course be
acquired only from sensory experience). Suppose, for example, that I look up whilst
hiking in the mountains and experience both a bright yellow sensation (from the sun)
and an adjacent dark grey one (from a rock). I then make the judgement that that col-
our (the yellow) is brighter than that colour (the dark grey). It seems to be a necessary
truth about those colour sensations that they are related in this way —the yellow could
not remain what it is whilst ceasing to be brighter than the dark grey. Moreover this
judgement seems to be one that I reach “intuitively ”and with complete certainty “by
the mere operation of thought ”, simply appealing to my knowledge of the relevant
ideas, and I cannot conceive of the relative brightness of the two colours being other
than it is. So far, then, criteria (Ra) and (Rd) tell strongly in favour of its being a rela-
tion of ideas, as do (Mp) and (Mcd). However an element of doubt might be raised by
there being no obvious contradiction in the judgement ’s failing to apply, and also the
apparent contingency of the sensation types ’existence: if there were no sentient beings,
then they would not exist.88Another example of the same kind, this time Hume ’s
own, comes from the Appendix to the Treatise :“Blue and green are different simple
ideas, but are more resembling than blue and scarlet ”(T1.1.7.7 n. 5).89Suppose I
form the proposition that “Blue resembles green more than scarlet ”: is this a relation
of ideas , as that term itself would seem to imply? Or is it a matter of fact, because we
can conceive without apparent contradiction of a situation in which those colours
would never have existed?
Although Hume himself does not discuss his Fork in relation to these sorts of exam-
ples, it seems that general truths about the phenomenal properties of “ideas ”should count
asrelations of ideas , notwithstanding the contingency of their existence. The point here
is that Humean relations of ideas involving general terms are in any case essentially
hypothetical. As we have seen, they are “discoverable by the mere operation of thought,
without dependence on what is any where existent in the universe .Though there never
were a circle or triangle in nature , the truths, demonstrated by E UCLID , would for ever
retain their certainty and evidence. ”(E4.1, my emphasis). So when I discover that
Pythagoras ’s Theorem is true, this reveals a property which anything that corresponds to
my idea of a right-angled triangle must have; it does not prove that any such things exist
88In the Treatise , Hume notoriously suggests that “all our perceptions are ...distinct and separable, ...
and may exist separately, and have no need of any thing else to support their existence ”(T1.4.5.5, cf.
1.4.5.24, 1.4.6.3, Appendix 12–14). But given Hume ’s analysis of the self as a bundle of perceptions,
Appendix 16 seems to hold on to the principle that perception implies a sentient being, even if constituted
only by the one perception: “We can conceive a thinking being ...reduc ’d even below the life of an
oyster ...to have only one perception, as of thirst or hunger ”. Quite apart from all this, however, I
expect that the nominalist Hume would in any case consider perceptions to be contingent existences, bothas tokens and types.
89Hume presents this example as showing that “even different simple ideas may have a similarity or resem-
blance to each other; nor is it necessary, that the point or circumstance of resemblance shou ’d be distinct
or separable from that in which they differ ”. His recognition of this point —which puts some signi ﬁcant
pressure on his Separability Principle —was apparently prompted by a letter from Francis Hutcheson, to
which Hume alludes in a response of 16thMarch 1740 ( HLi 39).
46 PETER MILLICAN“in nature ”.90In the same way, when I grasp that yellow is brighter than dark grey, this
reveals a relation which must hold between any such colour perceptions, and that relation
is a general necessity, which will remain true even in a situation where no such percep-
tions are actually occurring.
One might doubt, however, whether it is appropriate to describe the denial of such phe-
nomenal judgements as contradictory . In post-Fregean logic and philosophy, we standardly
mean by a “contradiction ”either a proposition having the logical form ( P∧¬P) or, more
loosely, a proposition from which such an explicit formal contradiction can be swiftly
deduced. Hume himself usually talks in ways consistent with this, frequently referring to
propositions as implying a contradiction and even once —atT1.3.9.10—as implying “a for-
mal contradiction ”.91He also, as we have seen, explicitly links such contradictoriness (of
the contrary) with intuitive or demonstrative certainty (e.g. T1.3.3.3, 1.3.9.10; A11, 18;
E4.2, 4.18, 12.28), and includes within the province of intuition those resemblances ,con-
trarieties , and relative degrees in quality between ideas which “atﬁrst strike the eye, or
rather the mind ”(T1.3.1.2). On this basis, yellow ’s being brighter than dark grey has to
count as intuitively certain, and hence its denial as “implying a contradiction ”. But in fact
this is not seriously problematic, given that anything which follows intuitively from a
proposition is implied by it, so that denying an intuitive truth does indeed imply a contradic-
tion.92Thus we preserve the equivalence between Hume ’s various criteria, though there is
perhaps some price to be paid in this loosening of the notion of a “contradiction ”,93while
deeper exploration into the modality of relations between phenomenal sensations lookspotentially murky. The very fact that they are phenomenal makes it hard to articulate —or
even to understand clearly —how we can be so con ﬁdent of some of their properties and
relationships: for example, that nothing can be both uniformly yellow, and dark grey, at the
same time. It might seem totally evident to us that a part of our visual ﬁeld which looks like
90Locke ’s account of our knowledge of universal truths is also hypothetical in this way, informing us about
whatever things may correspond to our ideas (without guaranteeing that there are any): “...our Knowl-
edge follows the Nature of our Ideas . If the Ideas are abstract, whose agreement or disagreement we per-
ceive, our Knowledge is universal. For what is known of such general Ideas , will be true of every
particular thing, in whom ...that abstract Idea is to be found: and what is once known of such Ideas ,
will be ...for ever true. ”(Essay IV iii 31). He makes the same point when explaining the nature of gen-
eral reasoning: “Every Man ’s Reasoning and Knowledge, is only about the Ideas existing in his own
Mind, which are truly ...particular Existences: and our Knowledge and Reasoning about other Things,
is only as they correspond with those our particular Ideas . So that the Perception of the Agreement, or
Disagreement of our particular Ideas , is the whole and utmost of all our Knowledge. Universality is but
accidental to it, and consists only in this, That the particular Ideas , about which it is, are such, as more
than one particular Thing can correspond with, and be represented by. ”(IV xvii 8; cf. III v 14, III vi 4 –
6; IV iv 5 –9, IV vi 4, 16). An excellent discussion of Locke ’s theory is provided by Ayers (1991), vol.
1 ch. 27; see especially pp. 249 –50.
91For other examples from the Treatise and Enquiry , see T1.1.7.4, 1.2.2.9, 1.2.4.11, 1.3.3.3, 1.4.7.7,
2.3.1.18; T App. 13;A11, 18; E2.4, 4.2, 4.18, 5.11, 12.28. At T1.1.7.4 he talks of a proposition ’s
implying “theﬂattest of all contradictions, viz.that’tis possible for the same thing both to be and not to
be”(T1.1.7.4). This suggests that he considers contradictoriness to come in degrees of “ﬂatness ”—not
all contradictions, therefore, take the form ( P∧¬P).
92IfPis intuitively true, then ¬Pwill intuitively imply ( P∧¬P), which is indeed a formal contradiction.
93In the Treatise , Hume frequently conjoins talk of “contradiction ”and“absurdity ”, mostly treating them
as equivalent (but see also note 63 above). In the Enquiry , by contrast, contradiction and absurdity are
connected only at E12.18 –20 (including n. 34), while absurdity is often interpreted more loosely (e.g.
E1.17, 8.32, 10.16, 10.19, 10.22, 12.2). Both the Abstract andEnquiry are very explicit that “wherever
a demonstration takes place, the contrary ...implies a contradiction ”(A11, cf. T1.3.3.3, 1.3.9.10; A18;
E4.2, 4.18, 12.28).
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 47thiscannot at the same time look like that—and we might even apply the word “contradic-
tion”to the conjunction of the two —but words fail us in trying to spell this out with any
rigour. So even if Hume ’s Fork survives the attendant problems, we might well regret the
loss of the simpler, more formal understanding of a contradiction from which we started.
6.3. Quinean Quibbles
A quite different range of problem cases for Hume ’s Fork arises most prominently in con-
nection with scienti ﬁc claims. Take for example the proposition “Hydrogen has an atomic
number of 1 ”. On the one hand, it was a scienti ﬁc discovery that hydrogen has one proton in
its nucleus. But on the other hand, this is now arguably the de ﬁning characteristic of hydro-
gen: an atom with more protons wouldn ’t be called “hydrogen ”, however it behaved. So the
proposition started out looking like a matter of fact, but seems to have become a relation of
ideas. Or consider Newton ’s Second Law, “Force equals mass times acceleration ”, which
apparently purports to state a universal matter of fact. But is it perhaps a relation of ideas?
After all, force is measured in units of mass times acceleration, so this law might appear to
be a deﬁnition of force rather than a generalisation about the way things behave. To get
unambiguously factual implications, we must combine it with something like the Third
Law, “Action and reaction are equal and opposite ”, which now tells us that in deep space
(beyond the reach of gravity or other forces) the mass of a rocket times its acceleration will
be equal and opposite to the mass of its exhaust gases times their acceleration. Yet even here
there are complications, because an object ’s mass is not directly perceivable, and so can be
assessed only from its behaviour (in particular, its acceleration when acted upon by a force).
The lesson to be drawn from examples like these is that when we are dealing with theo-
retical concepts, particularly those embedded deep within scienti ﬁc theories and which thus
have a wide range of interlocking relationships with other concepts, it can be very unclear
which of these relationships count as “deﬁnitions ”and which as “matters of fact ”. Usually a
theory as a whole will have relatively clear factual implications, but it may be impossible to
isolate the factual implications of any individual statement within that theory, because each
statement impinges on experience only when combined with others. Hume ’s simple distinc-
tion is straightforwardly applicable to theoretical concepts, therefore, only when they have a
clear independent de ﬁnition or a relatively direct link with experience. Since it took more
than 200 years after the publication of his Enquiry for this point to be widely appreciated,
thanks to the work of Willard Van Orman Quine,94it is not surprising that Hume ’s own—
very cursory —comments on such theoretical concepts and scienti ﬁc laws (notably at
E4.13, 7.25 n. 16, and 7.29 n. 17) show no awareness of their potential implications for
his“Fork”. But what is, perhaps, surprising is that this Quinean objection can be helpful to
Hume in answering awkward questions about the status of some of his own suspiciously
aprioristic arguments for matters of fact (and perhaps even about the status of his Fork itself—see note 122 below). At T2.3.3, for example, he famously urges the apparently causal
claim that “reason alone can never produce any action, or give rise to volition ”(T2.3.3.4)
on the basis of what look like conceptual arguments. One might well suspect that Hume is
confusing conceptual and causal claims here (cf. my 2012b: 122), but Blackburn (2008: 57 –
9) defends him by applying a broadly Quinean treatment to the famous argument.
94Quine (1953) famously expresses scepticism about the analytic/synthetic distinction.
48 PETER MILLICAN7. Analyticity, Apriority, and Necessity
We have seen that Hume ’s Fork encounters some potential complications in particular spe-
cial cases involving ﬁrst-personal awareness of our own current “ideas ”, relations between
phenomenal sensations, and complex scienti ﬁc theories. Much more could be said on all of
these, but rather than pursue such special dif ﬁculties, let us turn to a more general and fun-
damental family of objections, arising from the multitude of criteria that Hume ’s Fork
attempts to combine.
Our discussion in §§4–5 above revealed four reliable Humean differentia between re-
lations of ideas andmatters of fact . And having established (Mcc) as a logical criterion
independent of psychological conceivability, this now clearly belongs with the demon-
strability criterion:
Logical (or Semantic) Criteria
(Rd/Md) Relations of ideas are intuitively or demonstratively certain , whereas
matters of fact cannot be demonstrated to be true or to be false .
(Mcc) Relations of ideas cannot be false on pain of contradiction , whereas
matters of fact can be either true or false, without contradiction .
A proposition is demonstrable —according to Hume —when its denial implies a contradic-
tion, so these two criteria (with “contradiction ”suitably interpreted) are intended to be
equivalent. Both concern what can be inferred from a given proposition, a logical matter
which depends on the “ideas ”concerned, or as we would now say, the relevant terms ’
meaning . Hence they might also be described as semantic criteria. The other two criteria
are respectively epistemological and metaphysical:
Epistemological Criterion
(Ra/Ma) Relations of ideas are discoverable a priori, by the mere operation of thought ,
whereas matters of fact can only be discovered (if at all) through experience .
Metaphysical Criterion
(Mp) Relations of ideas are necessarily true , whereas matters of fact are contingent
(i.e. both possibly true and possibly false).
Thus Hume ’s Fork implicitly con ﬂates at least three distinctions —one logical or seman-
tic, one epistemological, and one metaphysical —which might well be expected to come
apart. Within contemporary analytic philosophy, these three distinctions are now very
familiar under the following names, though how exactly they are best to be understood
remains a matter of controversy.
Analytic/Synthetic
A proposition is analytic if its truth follows purely from the meanings of the
terms that it contains (hence its denial implies a contradiction); synthetic if its
truth depends on facts about the world, and not just on meanings (hence it can
be denied without contradiction).
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 49A priori/A posteriori
A proposition is a priori if it can be known to be true without consulting experi-
ence; a posteriori if it can be known only by consulting experience.
Necessary/Contingent
A proposition is necessary (necessarily true) if it could not possibly be false (i.e.
its negation is impossible); contingent if it is neither necessarily true nor neces-
sarily false.
Here I have chosen de ﬁnitions that ﬁt relatively easily into the Humean mould, so as to
consider how far his framework can plausibly be preserved in the face of the various
objections to be discussed.
7.1. A Kripkean Objection
The best-known alleged mismatch between these distinctions in contemporary philosophy
derives from the work of Saul Kripke, who famously claimed to identify propositions that
are necessary a posteriori (such as that Hesperus is Phosphorus) or contingent a priori (suchas that the standard metre bar is one metre long). The latter category relies on the con-
tentious claim that reference- ﬁxing stipulations —e.g.“I hereby stipulate that the length of
this bar is one metre ”—can count as a priori.
95So let us focus here on the necessary a poste-
riori, which is less controversial. To take the standard example, ancient Greeks gave the
name “Hesperus ”to the “Evening Star ”, and “Phosphorus ”to the “Morning Star ”; but these
“stars”were later discovered to be the same object, known to us as the planet Venus. Many
contemporary philosophers would agree that the identity “Hesperus is Phosphorus ”
expresses a truth which is (weakly) necessary —true in any possible world in which the
object concerned (i.e. Venus) exists —while the actual truth of “Hesperus is Phosphorus ”
was clearly a discovery of empirical astronomy. And this apparently challenges Hume ’s
Fork, by exhibiting a proposition which would be judged to be a “matter of fact ”by criteria
(Ma) and (Md), but a “relation of ideas ”by criterion (Mp). It would also challenge Hume ’s
Conceivability Principle, given that the falsehood of “Hesperus is Phosphorus ”, though ex
hypothesi impossible, seems to be conceivable: we can coherently imagine that astronomers
have been deceiving us regarding the identity of what appear to us as the Morning Star and
the Evening Star.96Along with such identities, Kripke also claimed that objects ’origin and
composition can be necessary a posteriori. Take, for example, the proposition “Venus is
composed of rock ”, which arguably ascribes an essential property: in any counterfactual
scenario, an object that was not composed of rock could not correctly be identi ﬁed with the
planet Venus (even if it looked the same and orbited in the same path).97Yet it was clearly
an empirical discovery that Venus is composed of rock rather than Aristotelian aether, and
95For a useful discussion that questions the contingent a priori on this basis, see Casullo (2003: 205 –9).
96Kail (2007a: 94) presents the example of Hesperus and Phosphorus as casting doubt on Hume ’s commit-
ment to the Conceivability Principle, at least as applying to objects in re , by illustrating that “Without
some restrictions in place, the imagination cannot with any plausibility be thought to entitle one toknowledge of metaphysical modality ”. Millican (2009: 678, 683 –4) objects that appeal to such examples
in the interpretation of Hume is anachronistic, and argues against Kail that Hume is fully committed to
the Conceivability Principle. See also notes 65 and 76 above.
97Kripke ’sNaming and Necessity (1980: 113 –15) gives the example of a wooden table that could not but
consist of the wood from which it was made (as opposed to ice, say).
50 PETER MILLICANagain, it is not inconceivable that astronomers have been deceiving us all these years, or that
Venus is really a metal alien spacecraft cunningly designed to appear as a rocky planet.
Thus we have another proposition which is, we believe, (weakly) necessary, but neverthe-
less known only empirically and even potentially subject to doubt. So again a wedge seems
to be driven between the various criteria for Hume ’s Fork.
7.2. “The Objects of Human Reason or Enquiry ”
How might we respond on Hume ’sb e h a l f ?N o t e , ﬁrst, that he need not reject the Kripkean
examples outright, for although it is commonly ass umed that his general anti-metaphysical stance
would preclude any essentialist claim s, in fact he repeatedly attributes essences—understood as
deﬁning characteristics —to a wide range of things, from chanc e and necessity to belief, beauty,
virtue, and wit.98Admittedly, none of these is a concrete particular, and allowing essences of
individuals might be harder for H ume to stomach, potentially con ﬂicting with his apparently
sceptical discussions of physical objects and se lves. But let us here put such concerns to one side,
because interpretation of these discussions is notor iously controversial, and it is also unclear how
far Hume maintained such views after the Treatise . In any case, his opposition to essences or
substantial forms of the Aristot elian variety (as expressed at T1.4.3.6) is entire ly consistent with
acknowledging the relatively inof fensive criteria of identity that underlie Kripkean essences of
origin and composition. These can be accepted on the basis that we can make no sense of coun-
terfactually identifying some object as Venus (for instance) except by means of a common his-
tory that counterfactually diverges at some point. We can imagine a possible world in which
V e n u si so c c u p i e db ya l i e n sa n dg r a d u a l l yt r a n s f o r m e di n t oar o c k ys p a c e c r a f t( t h o u g hi ft h er o c k
were to be replaced by alien matter, we would probably consider that Venus had been destroyed).
But in a possible world where no such planet ever existed in the ﬁrst place, an alien spacecraft —
whatever its composition —could not be identi ﬁed with Venus , even if it came to occupy the same
orbit and to appear in the familiar way. That, at least, is the story, and it provides a plausible
account of how such necessities can be accommodated within a modally modest worldview. Thisis all reasonably close in spirit to the kinds of es sences that Hume is happy to acknowledge, tied
to criteria of de ﬁnition and identi ﬁcation rather than any supposed insight into ultimate form.
99
98Alanen, for instance, expresses puzzlement based on the common assumption: “it is rather peculiar that
[Hume] should talk about essences or ‘the very being ’of anything at all, given his general commitment
not to pronounce himself on the inner natures or essences of things ...‘Essence ’here [ T2.1.5.4] cer-
tainly cannot mean necessary andsufﬁcient conditions ...”(2006: 187). But as Merivale (2009: §2.2)
points out in response to her, Hume speci ﬁes the “very essence ”of many things in many places: beauty
and deformity at T2.1.8.2 (cf. P2.18); belief at T1.4.2.24; cause and effect at T1.4.5.33; chance at
T1.3.11.12; connexion or power at T1.3.14.16; (causal) necessity at T2.3.1.10, 2.3.2.2, E8.22 n. 18
and 8.25 n. 19 (cf. T1.3.14.22); (natural) relation at T1.4.2.34 (cf. 1.4.6.16); riches at T2.1.10.10 and
M6.33; vice and virtue at T2.1.7.4-5; and wit at T 2.1.7.7 and P2.16.
99On this sort of account, Kripkean essences are known by “intuitions ”about how we would identify and
track objects in counterfactual scenarios. But there is room for debate about such intuitions, which cannotalways be decided by appeal to standard linguistic practices. Consider, for example, the situation of a
man Swho is doubtful of his own parentage and who is speculating about a counterfactual scenario in
which the person currently occupying exactly his position had different parents from those he actuallyhas. “Intuitions ”about identity of origin would dictate that this counterfactual scenario concerns someone
other than S, but Shimself is very unlikely to be convinced: he will take himself to be speculating about
a situation in which hewould have had different parents. In such a case, it seems very natural to trace a
person ’s identity backwards through time from the current point rather than forwards from their origin,
and it is not clear that this can properly be called mistaken , even though it is contrary to our usual for-
ward-tracking practice (which naturally leads to the assignment of necessity of origin).
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 51Suppose, then, that Hume were to accept the Kripkean necessities: would this force
him to abandon his Fork? Perhaps surprisingly, it would not, because a careful analy-
sis of what those necessities involve reveals that they are somewhat different from
Hume ’s“objects of human reason and enquiry ”. To see this, consider the supposedly
necessary truths that Hesperus is composed of rock and that Phosphorus is composed
of rock , and let us ask: Are these one and the same “truth ”, or different “truths ”?
In a sense, they do seem to be identical, because they attribute the same property to
the very same object, and it is in virtue of this same property ’s essentiality to that
same object that they are judged to be necessary. But in another sense, they seem to
be different “truths ”, because someone unaware of their co-reference could coherently
believe one without believing the other, and they thus express different Fregean
“thoughts ”.100Both of these notions of “truth identity ”, though clearly distinct, seem
legitimate and potentially useful. So glib talk of “truths ”turns out to be an invitation
to muddle and confusion, hiding complications that need to be teased out with care
and precision. Now is not the time to investigate these issues in detail, but suf ﬁce it
to say that we should at the very least distinguish the type of “de re proposition ”(to
coin a term) to which we attribute de re necessity—such as that Venus/Hesperus/
Phosphorus is made of rock —from the type of “thought ”(or whatever) in terms of
which we individuate beliefs. The de re proposition , identi ﬁed in terms of the objects
involved and the properties ascribed, can then harmlessly be considered as transpar-
ently “containing ”the relevant objects, in the sense that its identity is tied to those
objects.101But this need not imply that a corresponding thought orbelief has to be
individuated in the same way, for it is plausible that any thought of an object must
involve some mediating “mode of presentation ”,“representation ”,o r “aspect ”through
which that object is apprehended, and which will typically be crucial to understanding
the psychological and epistemological signi ﬁcance of that thought.102Hence for
someone who is unaware that Hesperus and Phosphorus are one and the same,
“Hesperus is made of rock ”and “Phosphorus is made of rock ”will express different
100Note that here and subsequently I am understanding the notion of thought in an internalist manner, to
capture the proposition as understood from the thinker ’s perspective, independently of the external situa-
tion. This is strongly suggested by Frege ’s treatment of a thought as the Sinn—that is, the mode of pre-
sentation—of a sentence, and is also obviously appropriate to the highly subjectivist Humean framework
which takes a thought to be composed of ideas.
101Such propositions are commonly called “Russellian ”propositions (since McDowell 1984, and for a rele-
vant recent example see Williamson 2006: 2 –3). However this term seems somewhat infelicitous given
Bertrand Russell ’s own view of ordinary proper names as disguised de ﬁnite descriptions, which he takes
to imply that propositions involving such names have the corresponding descriptions, rather than the
objects themselves, as constituents.
102In two recent general discussions of these issues, Frege ’s term “mode of presentation ”is preferred by
Schiffer (2008) and “representation ”by Richard (2006: 193), but “aspect ”usefully combines the advan-
tages of speci ﬁcity and brevity. It is a deep and dif ﬁcult question how such aspects are to be charac-
terised and individuated, one that Frege somewhat trivialised by choosing straightforward examples suchas the Morning Star and the Evening Star, which present themselves in only one paradigm way. Objectsand organisms that appear to us in a far wider range of contexts, with ample possibilities of misidenti ﬁ-
cation, offer far more of a challenge. In what follows, I shall ignore such complications, and take for
granted that something like the Fregean notion of a shared and objective “mode of presentation ”is ten-
able. For serious doubts about this, however, see Millican (1990: §V), which follows Dennett (1982) in
speaking of more person-speci ﬁc“notional objects ”.
52 PETER MILLICANthoughts or beliefs, despite their both corresponding (in fact) to the same de re
proposition.103
All this might seem a long way from Hume ’s concerns, but its upshot is to de ﬂect the
Kripkean attack on his Fork. For the “relations of ideas ”and“matters of fact ”that Hume
considers—his“objects of human reason and enquiry ”—are composed of ideas , and as
such, they map far more easily onto what I have called thoughts than onto de re proposi-
tions.104Hence the sort of necessity applicable to them is not the de re necessity that
Kripke identi ﬁes, but instead a conceptual necessity that comes close to apriority .Ad e
re proposition —individuated in terms of the objects concerned and the properties
ascribed—is naturally considered necessarily true if its identity conditions are such as to
imply its truth. Thus the de re proposition expressed by “Venus is made of rock ”turns
out to be de re necessary if, and only if, Venus is necessarily rocky.105A thought, like-
wise, should be deemed necessarily true if its identity conditions imply its truth. But
since a thought is individuated in terms of the ideas and modes of presentation involved,
rather than the objects, its appropriate form of necessity turns out to be rather different.
In the idiolect of someone who associates “Hesperus ”with one mode of presentation,
and“Phosphorus ”with another, the sentence “Hesperus is Phosphorus ”is not necessarily
true in this sense , even though it expresses (unbeknown to him) a de re proposition that
isde re necessary . Or to take another example, suppose that I dub the number of stars in
the Universe “Starnum ”, intended as a name that refers “rigidly ”to that very number,
whatever it might be ,106and suppose that (unbeknown to me) it is 1022. I then utter the
sentence “There are Starnum stars ”, thus expressing (unbeknown to me) the true —but
contingent —de re proposition that there are 1022stars. But the thought I express, indi-
viduated not in terms of the referent, but rather my understanding of the name “Star-
num”,i sconceptually necessary, in the sense that its truth is guaranteed by the nature of
the ideas that it involves: this very thought could not but be true.107Or to put this
103There is an analogy here between reference to an object and expression of a (de re) proposition. Just as
we can refer to a single object using a variety of referring expressions (e.g. “Venus, “Hesperus ”,“Phos-
phorus ”), each potentially associated with a different aspect , so we can express a single de re proposi-
tion using a variety of sentences, each associated with a different thought . The picture thus suggested is
somewhat Fregean, except that it goes more naturally with seeing a de re proposition —rather than a
truth value —as the Fregean Reference (i.e. Bedeutung ) of a sentence, and also allows thoughts to be rel-
ative to the individual thinker, rather than “objective ”as Frege insisted.
104We have already noted twice, in §1 and §3 above, that Hume has a tendency —at least in the Treatise—
to blur the distinction between ideas and objects, which would in turn blur the distinction drawn here,between thoughts and de re propositions . This defence of his Fork against Kripkean attacks requires
greater precision on these matters than he himself showed, but that is hardly surprising given his lack of
sophistication in regard to the theory of reference.
105We can here ignore complications regarding Venus ’s potential non-existence, since weak necessity is
enough for present purposes.
106The notion of rigid designation comes, of course, from Kripke (e.g. 1980: 48 –9), and would have been
quite alien to Hume.
107It might be tempting to talk of “de dicto ”necessity here, but this traditional term does not quite capture
the intended sense, because it suggests the consideration of a proposition as expressed in words as
opposed to thought. Better would be a term such as “de aspectu ”, so as to highlight the intended focus
on these propositions, individuated in terms of aspects, modes of presentation, or appearance to the
mind , rather than either objects and properties ( de re ), or words ( de dicto ). Many thanks to Christopher
Shields for suggesting this term.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 53slightly differently, the way in which I conceive of Starnum —my thought about it —is
such as to identify it as the number of the stars; hence the thought I express by “There
are Starnum stars ”could not conceivably be false (even though the de re proposition to
which it corresponds is contingent). In short, if it is the necessity of thoughts, rather than
of de re propositions, that Hume has in mind, then its connection with conceivability is
not threatened by these sorts of examples. So the centrality that he gives to the
Conceivability Principle (as well as his emphasis on ideas as the vehicles of thought)
strongly con ﬁrms that this is indeed how we should interpret his views on absolute
necessity.
7.3. Thoughts and Words
This approach thus defuses the Kripkean objections to Hume ’s con ﬂation of the criteria
associated with necessity and apriority. But it remains unclear whether what I have called
conceptual necessity —the necessity of thoughts as implied by the nature of the “ideas ”
that constitute them —will also match closely to that other modern notion associated with
Humean relations of ideas, namely analyticity . This notion has traditionally been under-
stood as involving “truth in virtue of meaning ”,108and the standard contrast is with
propositions whose truth is dependent on “the way the world is ”or“the facts of experi-
ence”(cf. Ayer in footnote 2 above). As before, however, it is pertinent to consider the
nature of the “truths ”or“propositions ”involved here, which turn out to be neither de re
propositions northoughts . For if they are to be bearers of meaning , then since it is lan-
guage that is paradigmatically meaningful, it seems most appropriate to consider sen-
tences (considered as bearers of meaning rather than merely as strings of characters) as
the relevant candidates for analyticity.
Hume follows Locke (e.g. Essay III ii 1 –3, III iv 6) in taking the meaning of words to
be determined by the corresponding ideas,109thus generally equating the meaning of a
sentence with the thought that it expresses. But even if we leave aside the point —familiar
at least since Ludwig Wittgenstein and J. L. Austin —that language can be used for many
speech-acts other than the expression of thoughts using declarative sentences, there are
several problems here. First, if ideas are presumed to be subjectively introspectible, as
108However there is a standard objection to this characterisation of analyticity, namely, that appeal to mean-
ing can at best explain why a particular sentence expresses the corresponding proposition, and cannot —
except in the case of a simple de ﬁnition—explain what makes that proposition true. Thus it might plau-
sibly be a “truth of meaning ”that a bachelor is by de ﬁnition an unmarried man, but the drawing of any
inference from this de ﬁnition—e.g. that all happy bachelors are happy men , or that if any bachelor is a
philosopher, then some philosopher is unmarried —requires the application of logical reasoning, not just
an appeal to meaning. Likewise, even if 2 is de ﬁned as the sum 1 +1, and 3 as the sum 2 +1, it remains
a mathematical (rather than merely de ﬁnitional) truth that 1 +3=2+2. For this sort of reason, an analytic
truth has more satisfactorily been understood as one whose truth is necessarily implied by the meanings
of the terms, without appeal to any empirical contingency, though of course this still leaves plenty of
room for discussion about what kind of “necessary implication ”is involved here (e.g. a priori, or con-
ceptual, or logical).
109Hume assumes that meaning is determined by ideas (e.g. T1.3.7.3; E2.9), but mostly comments on this
when absence of an idea threatens lack of meaning (e.g. T1.1.6.1, 1.3.14.27, 1.4.3.10, 1.4.5.6; E7.26).
His theory in the Treatise goes beyond Locke ’s in providing a more sophisticated treatment of general
ideas (explained in T1.1.7), and also emphasises the existence of “ﬁctions ”, which Hume generally
seems to regard negatively while at the same time giving them a signi ﬁcant role in our thinking (e.g. T
1.2.4.24; 1.4.2.29, 35 –6, 42 –3, 52; 1.4.6.6 –7).
54 PETER MILLICANHume usually seems to take for granted,110then they will inevitably differ between indi-
viduals, implying a variability in word meaning that is at least problematic for common
understanding of a language.111Secondly, much of our language use involves words for
which we have no clear “ideas ”at all, where we take advantage of —and defer to —
other ’s understanding to provide content for what we say. Hilary Putnam famously drew
attention to this phenomenon of “the division of linguistic labour ”, giving examples of
pairs of terms whose subjective “concepts ”might well be indistinguishable for a non-
expert (such as aluminium versus molybdenum, or elm versus beech tree), but whose ref-
erence we nevertheless take to be quite different.112Thirdly, even if we suppose that my
understanding of the relevant words is entirely reliable, or that we are content to focuson my personal idiolect without any element of deference to others ’semantic authority, a
gap can still open up between the apparent conceptual necessity of my thoughts and the
analyticity of the sentences through which I express them. For example, when out walk-
ing I might say “That man is very still ”, when pointing to what is, unbeknown to me, a
rock that happens to look rather like a man. In such a context, the sentence “That man is
a man ”would fail to be true (and hence it cannot be analytic), even though it might seem
to express a conceptually necessary “relation of ideas ”between my concept of the object
(which I take to be a man) and my concept of manhood.
113This raises the general ques-
tion of how far the properties we ascribe to particular things should be included within
our“ideas ”of them. Some of these properties will be expressible in words, but not guar-
anteed to apply (e.g. manhood in the case of the rock); others may be epistemologicallymore secure (e.g. the visual look of the rock), but derived from sensory presentations that
are at best only vaguely expressible using words. Such considerations, especially when
combined with the quest for an indubitable foundation for knowledge in the face of scep-
ticism, can naturally lead towards the sort of semantic-epistemological atomism that Ber-
trand Russell inherited from Hume, aspiring to analyse the concepts that compose our
110As at T1.4.2.7: “For since all actions and sensations of the mind are known to us by consciousness,
they must necessarily appear in every particular what they are, and be what they appear. Every thing
that enters the mind, being in reality a perception, ’tis impossible any thing shou ’dt o feeling appear dif-
ferent. ”Hume is here thinking more of impressions than ideas, but he points out elsewhere the implica-
tion of his Copy Principle that “the ideas, which are copy ’d from [impressions], must be of the same
nature ”(T1.3.1.7, cf. 1.1.7.5, 1.3.7.5). There is, however, some tension between the transparency of
ideas to introspection and the quest to clarify or re ﬁne them by seeking the original impression, which
Hume rather downplays by blaming any unclarity on our failure to keep ideas “steady and precise ”(T
1.3.1.7, and cf. note 74 above).
111Suppose, for example, that storms in my experience have always involved wind, so that windiness entersinto the very identity of my concept of a storm (but not, perhaps, into yours). Suppose I now form thethought that storms are always windy: from an internalist view, this seems to be a “relation of ideas ”for
me (but not, perhaps, for you).
112See Putnam (1975: 225 –9). That paper also introduced the “Twin Earth ”thought experiment, and was
highly in ﬂuential in promoting linguistic externalism, expressed memorably and forcefully on p. 227:
“Cut the pie any way you like, ‘meanings ’just ain ’t in the head!”.
113All the more so if we follow Hume ’s theory of “abstract or general ideas ”ofTreatise 1.1.7, and take
my understanding of “man”to involve a customary association between the word and a revival set (in
the terminology of Garrett 1997: 24) which might, presumably, come to include my perception of therock as a member; that is, as one of the perceptions that springs to mind when I think “man”, and there-
fore (arguably) becomes constitutive of my concept. Elsewhere in this paper I have ignored the compli-
cations that would arise from this theory, partly because it plays little explicit role in Hume ’s own
treatment of the relevant topics, even in the Treatise (thus suggesting he had not thought it through in
detail), and partly because it is entirely absent from the Enquiry , except for a hint at E12.20 n. 34.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 55thoughts in terms of “sense-data ”, and ultimately reducing sense-data to immediate per-
ceptual simples. A more limited —but apparently more plausible —response would be to
give up on any attempt to analyse atomistically the rich, holistic, non-linguistic thoughts
that we have about the concrete particulars of our experience, and to focus instead on
thoughts of the strict Fregean kind, compositionally constructed through disciplined rules
of language from distinctly understood and consistent “senses ”. Thus interpretatively con-
ﬁned, it looks as though any genuine “relation of ideas ”(i.e. any Fregean thought that
expresses a transparently reliable connection between the senses concerned) will inevita-
bly correspond to a sentence in the thinker ’s idiolect that cannot but express a truth. So
if such well-de ﬁned“senses ”are to be found, then within this restricted vocabulary and
repertoire of linguistically structured thoughts, we might reasonably hope to ﬁnd an exact
correspondence between analyticity, apriority, and conceptual necessity. Something like
this approach might appeal especially to advocates of the “language of thought ”hypothe-
sis promoted by Jerry Fodor, who has indeed recently looked to Hume for inspiration.114
7.4. Probability and Incompleteness
In addition to these problems raised by recent Philosophy of Language, there are at least
two others that arise from Epistemology and the Philosophy of Mathematics, re ﬂecting
recent developments that cast further doubt on the equivalence of Hume ’s various criteria.
First, he consistently takes for granted that a priori evidence must be intuitive or demonstra-
tive in force —thus implying conceptual necessity—and cannot be merely probable.115Most
philosophers, indeed, have made this same assumption, to the extent that “a priori ”and“a
priori certain ”have generally been regarded as equivalent. But it is not obvious that this is
correct, and there is plenty of room for debate about the possibility of fallible a priori justi ﬁ-
cation, or a priori grasp of probabilistic relations (as explored by thinkers in the “Logical ”
tradition of probability, such as John Maynard Keynes, Harold Jeffreys, and Rudolf Car-
nap).116If either possibility is ful ﬁlled, then criteria (Ra) and (Ma) —based on discoverabil-
ity“by the mere operation of thought ”—will diverge from the other criteria unless we
restrict this to discoverability a priori with certainty . But perhaps such a restriction will
seem a relatively small price to pay to maintain the overall account.
Secondly, the famous results of twentieth-century Philosophy of Mathematics associ-
ated with Kurt G €odel, Alonzo Church, and Alan Turing cast doubt on Hume ’s assumption
that whatever is conceptually necessary must ipso facto be intuitively or demonstratively
provable (or explicitly contradictory to deny). If we assume that any arithmetical truth is
conceptually necessary, as Hume presumably would agree, then G €odel’s First Incomplete-
ness Theorem tells us that any consistent formalisation of “demonstrative provability ”—in
terms of given axioms and inference rules —will inevitably leave “gaps”in the form of
114As in his 2003 book, Hume Variations . Fodor himself, however, is a conceptual atomist, sceptical about
the analytic/synthetic distinction except as arising from identities of conceptual atoms —see Fodor and
Lepore (2006).
115See for example T1.3.6.1, 1.3.11.2, 2.3.3.2; A11;E4.18–19.
116Casullo (2003: ch. 3) gives a very useful discussion of fallible a priori justi ﬁcation, considering recent
work in this spirit by Pollock (1974), Edidin (1984), BonJour (1985), Hale (1987) and Summer ﬁeld
(1991). The quest for a priori probability goes back much further and has attracted a wider range of
thinkers, typically associated with attempts to vindicate some form of the Principle of Indifference orcomparable principles of symmetry. For a discussion of attempts to apply a priori probability to theHumean problem of induction, see Millican (1996: 103 –237).
56 PETER MILLICANconceptually necessary truths that are not thus demonstratively provable. Even worse,
Church and Turing went on to show that we cannot devise a universal decision procedure
to establish de ﬁnitively whether any given proposition is demonstratively provable or not
—so we cannot even reliably identify the exceptional cases in which Hume ’s criteria for a
relation of ideas fail to agree. Hume himself naturally failed to anticipate these surprising
results, but so of course did everyone else for the best part of two centuries. And although
they cast a shadow over his Fork, they cast one equally over some conventional assump-
tions about the modern distinctions that descended from it.
8. Conclusion: the Enduring Value of Hume ’s Fork
The last few sections have raised more questions than they have answered about the ulti-
mate defensibility of Hume ’s Fork, and we certainly cannot conclude here that Hume
was successful in attempting to divide all the “objects of human reason or enquiry ”into
his two simple classes of relations of ideas andmatters of fact . Nevertheless, it is striking
how fruitful this discussion has been in terms of the centrality and signi ﬁcance of the
issues thus raised, involving so many prominent twentieth-century names: Quine, Kripke,
Frege, Wittgenstein, Austin, Putnam, Russell, Fodor, Keynes, Jeffreys, Carnap, G €odel,
Church, and Turing. Equally striking, in this respect, is the contrast between Hume ’s
Fork and his theory of relations from the Treatise , which as we saw in §3 above makes
gratuitous assumptions and elementary blunders that enable it to be refuted conclusively
by a few choice counterexamples. The theory encapsulated in Hume ’s Fork reaches a
quite different level of philosophical signi ﬁcance: it might ultimately fail, but the dif ﬁcul-
ties it faces are interesting, complex, and deep, raising serious and illuminating issues in
Epistemology and in the Philosophy of Language, Logic, and Mathematics.
Moreover it is worth noting in particular that none of the dif ﬁculties that we have
encountered has undermined the central thrust of Hume ’s Fork, namely, that a thought
cannot both possess the certainty that comes from being known a priori through ideasalone, while also at the same time conveying substantial factual knowledge of the empiri-
cal world . Even if we take on board Quine ’s now familiar point, that sometimes it might
be impossible to disentangle the “conceptual ”and“factual ”elements within a complex
theory, it still remains the case that the application of that theory to reality is ultimately a
matter of fact that cannot be established a priori. Nor is this fundamental message
affected by the developments in the theory of reference due to Kripke, Putnam and
others, whose impact —as we saw in §7.2 and §7.3 above —is to put greater distance
between thoughts and the sentences that express them. For even if I can voice a sentence
such as “There are Starnum stars ”which is guaranteed by reference- ﬁxing stipulations to
express an empirical truth, I cannot know which empirical truth that is
—in such a way as
to think or express it in standard numerical terms, or to draw observational consequencesfrom it—unless I know independently how many stars there are.
117
117This general moral becomes much easier to see and express within an atomistic empiricist framework
such as Hume ’s, in which it just appears obvious—given the Conceivability Principle —that no pattern
of past impressions and ideas can possibly guarantee, with absolute a priori certainty, the occurrence of
some future pattern of impressions and ideas (cf. Gendler and Hawthorne 2002: 21, who suggest that
“we can extract from Hume something like a ‘cut and paste ’story about possibility ”). Unfortunately this
obvious point becomes far harder to articulate within a more sophisticated framework that allows for therich complexity of our relationship with the world, especially when language is taken into account.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 57Thus Hume ’s Fork remains a valuable check on our intellectual consistency in cases
where conceptual and factual considerations tend to blur. Suppose —to take a topical
example—that an economist, inclined by the characteristic thinking of his discipline
towards psychological egoism, makes the claim that we universally act so as to maximise
our perceived “utility ”. When challenged over some apparently altruistic behaviour —a
woman volunteering to nurse the victims of an earthquake, say —his response is to assert
that the apparently sel ﬂess outcome must, after all, be something that the woman desires,
and hence a component of her own utility. She might appear to be acting for others, but
in reality she is just seeking the satisfaction of her own desires, and hence maximising
her own personal bene ﬁt, just as much as any avaricious ﬁnancier. Such nonsense can be
very effectively countered with a thrust of Hume ’s Fork: Is the claim that we act so as
to maximise our utility supposed to be a relation of ideas, or a matter of fact? If it is a
relation of ideas, then “utility ”is simply being used to mean whatever is the target of
our actions, in which case it cannot also mean personal bene ﬁt: there is no contradiction ,
after all, in our desiring someone else ’s bene ﬁt for its own sake (as any parent knows).118
If, on the other hand, the claim is a matter of fact, then it can only be decided by empiri-
cal investigation, and whether the nurse who helps earthquake victims is motivated by
self-interest or by genuine altruism is a matter of her psychology, not something that can
be determined a priori by the tautologous observation that she desires what she desires.
Hume ’s Fork thus retains its cutting edge, challenging any attempt to achieve a priori
knowledge of matters of fact. This challenge was evident to one of his early readers, withprofound implications for the development of philosophy, when Immanuel Kant identi-
ﬁed as the fundamental question of metaphysics: “How are a priori synthetic judgments
possible? ”(Critique : B 19).
119Kant ’s primary purpose in his metaphysical works is pre-
cisely to oppose Hume ’s implicit equation between the analytic and the a priori, by justi-
fying and explaining how some (synthetic) facts about the world can be known
independently of experience. Kant appreciates the force of Hume ’s claim that this is
impossible, but he has no doubt that it ispossible, because he believes there to be clearly
established examples of synthetic a priori knowledge, for example the truths of arithmetic
and Euclidean geometry, the basic principles of Newtonian physics, and the causalmaxim that “every alteration must have a cause ”.
120His explanation of this possibility is
complex and subtle, but his key strategy for bridging Hume ’s divide is transcendental
idealism , appealing to the idea that the knowing mind itself conditions the phenomenal
world—the spatial and temporal world of our experience —in such a way as to make that
experience possible. Hence we can know a priori that the phenomenal world will be con-
ditioned accordingly:
118Except, Quine might insist, within the context of a theory which presupposes that the target of our
actions is always our anticipated personal bene ﬁt and which de ﬁnes its terms accordingly; but then it is
a matter of fact whether that theory applies to real human beings, and straightforward observation showsthat it does not. Hume ’sTreatise evinces strong tendencies towards egoism, but by 1751 —probably as a
result of Butler ’si nﬂuence (Hume 1748: 177) —he was launching a full-scale attack on the “selﬁsh
hypothesis ”in what is now Appendix 2 of the second Enquiry .
119Kant ’s familiarity with Hume came mainly from the Enquiry , and there is evidence that he was reading
it very soon after the publication of a German translation in 1755 —see Kuehn (1983: 179 –80) for
details.
120See for example Critique :B4 –5, B 14 –18, B 232; Prolegomena :§2,§4,§15. The Foundations builds
on the Critique , endeavouring to derive the fundamental principles of Newtonian physics on the same a
priori basis.
58 PETER MILLICANIf intuition must conform to the constitution of the objects, I do not see how we could
know anything of the latter a priori ; but if the object (as object of the senses) must conform
to the constitution of our faculty of intuition, I have no dif ﬁculty in conceiving such a pos-
sibility. ( Critique : B xvii) .
How, then, can there exist in the mind an outer intuition which precedes the objects
themselves, and in which the concept of these objects can be determined a priori ? Mani-
festly, not otherwise than in so far as the intuition has its seat in the subject only, as theformal character of the subject ...Our explanation is thus the only explanation that
makes intelligible the possibility of geometry, as a body of a priori synthetic knowledge.
(Critique : B 41, cf. Prolegomena :§11)
Experience consists in the synthetic connection of appearances (perceptions) in a con-
sciousness, so far as this connection is necessary. Hence pure concepts of the understand-
ing are those under which all perceptions must ﬁrst be subsumed, before they can be
used for judgements of experience, in which the synthetic unity of perceptions is repre-sented as necessary and universally valid ...Hence these pure concepts of the under-
standing are the principles a priori of possible experience. Now the principles of possible
experience are at the same time universal laws of nature, which can be known a priori .
And thus the problem ...How is pure natural science possible? is solved. ( Prolegomena :
§§22–3)
However Hume ’s Fork is not so easily evaded, and Kant is too complacent in pre-
suming that apriority in the genetic sense of having “its seat in the subject only ”—
that is, contributed by the knowing mind —provides a relatively straightforward route
to apriority in the more usual epistemic sense. It is one thing to claim that our minds
must condition the world we experience; it is quite another to claim that we canknow a priori in what way our minds must do this. Hence even if Kant is right to
see space, for example, as a mind-dependent form of sensibility, he cannot justify his
claim to synthetic a priori knowledge of the Euclidean geometry of that phenomenal
space, unless he is able to prove a priori that Euclidean geometry must necessarily
govern whatever form our sensibility takes. So having started with the problem of
how we can achieve synthetic a priori knowledge of the physical world, Kant ends
up replacing it with the equally dif ﬁcult problem of how we can achieve synthetic a
priori knowledge of the workings of our mind. Mere empirical psychology obviously
cannot provide this, and any would-be “transcendental psychology ”remains an aspira-
tion rather than an achievement, unless Kant can ﬁnd some way to justify its sup-
posed synthetic a priori status. Had he faced up squarely to this problem, rather thantaking for granted that the synthetic apriority of mathematics required such a transcen-
dental account as the ground of its possibility, then Kant might have been given
pause by Hume ’s comments, in Enquiry Section 7, on the mysteriousness of our men-
tal activity:
...do we pretend to be acquainted with the nature of the human soul and the nature of
an idea, or the aptitude of the one to produce the other? ...the manner, in which this
operation is performed; the power, by which it is produced; is entirely beyond our com-
prehension. ...The command of the mind over itself is limited ...and these limits are
not known by reason, or any acquaintance with the nature of cause and effect; but onlyby experience and observation, as in all other natural events ...(E7.17–18) .
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 59Hume is quite clear that the operations of the mind are matters of fact, knowable —if at all
—only through experience. It follows that explaining the facts of the physical world in
terms of facts about the mind, even if philosophically insightful and appropriate, does noth-
ing whatever to explain how those facts can be conceptually necessary or epistemologically
a priori, and hence utterly fails to cross the great divide represented by his Fork.
Perhaps the single most important and abiding message from Hume ’s philosophy is
this insistence that matters of fact about the world of causally interacting things —from
planets and billiard balls to animals, humans, and gods —can be known (if at all) only
through experience. This message is encapsulated in his Fork and remains as pertinent
today as when he wrote it. Over that time his philosophy has enjoyed mixed fortunes,being eclipsed by Kant and his idealist successors throughout the nineteenth century, then
revived in the early twentieth century by Russell and the logical positivists such as Ayer.
Religious motives undoubtedly played a role here, with Hume ’s scepticism anxiously dis-
paraged while Christian belief was the norm, and his reputation correspondingly ﬂourish-
ing as traditional dogmas crumbled. But of his core philosophical doctrines, his Fork —
with its implicit denial that any matter of fact can be known a priori —has a good claim
to being the single best exemplar of his in ﬂuence. Kant ’s impressively sophisticated
(while pleasantly reassuring) response kept it at bay until the revolutionary scienti ﬁc
developments of Relativity and Quantum Mechanics forced a realisation that most of the
key propositions that he had taken to be clear examples of the synthetic a priori were not
only a posteriori but even probably false !
121Thus Hume ’s central principle, that facts
about the world can be known only through experience, was strikingly vindicated: arm-
chair metaphysics, no matter how sophisticated and convincing, is ultimately trumped by
empirical test.122This helps to explain the enthusiasm with which the logical positivists
—strongly motivated by a desire to make sense of the new science and to debunk meta-
physics—took up his Fork as their standard, combining it with a veri ﬁability criterion of
meaningfulness that likewise claimed a Humean pedigree (though distorting his philoso-
phy in the process).123But Hume ’s Fork outlasted veri ﬁcationism, informing philosophi-
cal orthodoxy at least until the time of Quine and Kripke.124Since then it has been
121Einstein ’s theories of Relativity imply that both the axioms of Euclid ’s geometry and Newton ’s laws of
mechanics are mere approximations to the truth, while the conventional interpretation of the theory ofQuantum Mechanics implies that at its deepest level, the world is non-deterministic (so not every event
has a suf ﬁcient antecedent cause).
122This historical sketch naturally raises the old chestnut regarding the status of Hume ’s Fork itself: is this
“central principle ”a relation of ideas, or a matter of fact? I am inclined to consider it a conceptual truth,
established by philosophical argument, and hence a relation of ideas. But there would be no obvious
contradiction in seeing it as a matter of fact, which we discover a posteriori and which could have been
false if we had turned out to have the sort of godlike rational insight considered counterfactually byPhilo in the Dialogues atD9.10. Another, more subtle, possibility is to interpret the claim as part of a
holistic theory whose presupposition is that we have no such supernatural faculty —it would then
become a Quinean amalgam, rather than falling neatly into either of Hume ’s categories. Thus the ques-
tion of its status need be no serious embarrassment on any of these accounts, and it does not run intothe familiar problems of its twentieth-century cousin, the veri ﬁcation principle, which is harder to place
coherently because it claims to rule on meaningfulness .
123Even though it shares a similar empiricist spirit, Hume ’s Copy Principle applies to individual ideas, and
hence should be sharply distinguished from veri ﬁability, which is a test on sentences or propositions.
124Forbes (1997) traces the contemporary debate about essentialism to Kripke and Putnam ( §2, p. 517), set
against the background of “our received notions about the grounds of necessity ...the traditional view,
which receives its paradigm formulation in Hume ’s writings ”, and which claims that “whatever necessi-
ties there are, are to be explained in terms of ‘relations of ideas ’.”(§4, p. 529).
60 PETER MILLICANunder a cloud, for reasons we have explored above, which indeed show that Hume ’s
rather simplistic distinction between “relations of ideas ”and“matters of fact ”requires at
least signi ﬁcant re ﬁnement. But nevertheless our discussion has indicated that these
attacks on his position leave his core principle, that substantial facts about the empirical
world can be known only through experience , fundamentally unscathed.125Admittedly
Hume has not proved this, but the repeated failures of attempts to circumvent it tell a
powerful message, and at least establish it as a serious hurdle for any would-be a priori
metaphysician. Most current philosophers, indeed, so far from attempting to challenge
the principle, would probably consider it unremarkable and even “obvious ”. But that in
itself is a mark of Hume ’s achievement, showing the extent to which the spirit of his
Fork has infused our philosophical “common sense ”.
References
Alanen, Lilli (2006), “The Powers and Mechanisms of the Passions ”,i nS a u l
Traiger (ed.), The Blackwell Guide to Hume ’s Treatise , Oxford: Blackwell, pp.
179–98.
Arnauld, Antoine and Nicole, Pierre (1662), Logic, or the Art of Thinking , translated by
Jill Vance Buroker, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Allison, Henry E. (2008), Custom and Reason in Hume , Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Ayer, A. J. (1971), Language, Truth and Logic , Harmondsworth: Penguin, new edition
(ﬁrst edition was 1936).
Ayers, Michael (1991), Locke I: Epistemology , New York: Routledge.
Beck, Lewis White (1978), “Analytic and Synthetic Judgments before Kant ”inEssays
on Kant and Hume , New Haven: Yale University Press, pp. 80 –100.
Beebee, Helen (2006), Hume on Causation , London: Routledge.
(2007), “Humes Old and New: The Two De ﬁnitions and the Doctrine of
Necessity ”,Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society 107, pp. 413 –31.
(2011), “Hume ’s Two De ﬁnitions: The Procedural Interpretation ”,Hume Studies 37
(2), pp. 243 –74.
Bennett, Jonathan (1971), Locke, Berkeley, Hume: Central Themes , Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
(2001), Learning from Six Philosophers, volume 2: Locke, Berkeley, Hume , Oxford:
Clarendon Press.
Berkeley, George (1710/34), A Treatise Concerning the Principles of Human Knowledge ,
ed. Jonathan Dancy, Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998 ( “Principles ”).
(1713/34), Three Dialogues between Hylas and Philonous , ed. Jonathan Dancy,
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1998 ( “Dialogues ”).
Blackburn, Simon (2008), How To Read Hume , London: Granta.
Boghossian, Paul and Peacocke, Christopher, eds (2000), New Essays on the A Priori ,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
125This is not to deny that there are complications in spelling out what exactly is meant by a “substantial
fact”and by “the empirical world ”, nor that relevant problems remain, particularly in respect of mathe-
matics (whose mysterious status has continued to puzzle and inspire philosophers). As with note 117
above, Hume ’s core message is much easier to express within a framework that focuses on inference
from past experience to future experience : then the point is that a priori, we cannot know what to expect
for the future, but must rely on extrapolation from past experience.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 61BonJour, Laurence (1985), The Structure of Empirical Knowledge , Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.
Butler, Joseph (1729), Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel , reprinted in The
Works of Joseph Butler , ed. W. E. Gladstone (Clarendon Press, 1896), vol. ii, pp. 1 –
274.
Casullo, Albert (2003), A Priori Justi ﬁcation , Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Chambers, Ephraim (1738), Cyclopaedia: Or, An Universal Dictionary of Arts and
Sciences , second edition, London ( ﬁrst edition was 1728).
Dennett, Daniel C. (1982), “Beyond Belief ”, in Andrew Wood ﬁeld (ed.), Thought and
Object , Clarendon Press, pp. 1 –95 and reprinted in Dennett, The Intentional Stance
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1987), pp. 117 –202.
Descartes, Ren /C19e (1641), Meditations on First Philosophy and Objections and Replies ,
translated by John Cottingham, in The Philosophical Writings of Descartes ,
translated by John Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff and Dugald Murdoch, Cambridge
University Press, 1984 ( “CSM ”), vol. ii, pp. 1 –383.
Edidin, Aron (1984), “A Priori Knowledge for Fallibilists ”,Philosophical Studies 46, pp.
189–97.
Flew, Antony (1961), Hume ’s Philosophy of Belief , London: Routledge & Kegan Paul.
(1979), A Dictionary of Philosophy , London: Pan Books.
Fodor, Jerry A. (2003), Hume Variations , Oxford: Oxford University Press.
and Lepore, Ernie (2006), “Analyticity Again ”, in Michael Devitt and Richard
Hanley (eds), The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Language , Oxford:
Blackwell, pp. 114 –130.
Forbes, Graeme (1997), “Essentialism ”, in Bob Hale and Crispin Wright (eds), A
Companion to the Philosophy of Language , Oxford: Blackwell, pp. 515 –33.
Frasca –Spada, Marina (1998), Space and the Self in Hume ’s Treatise , Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.
Frege, Gottlob (1884), Foundations of Arithmetic , translated by J. L. Austin, Oxford:
Blackwell, second revised edition, 1953 ( ﬁrst edition was 1950).
Garrett, Don (1997), Cognition and Commitment in Hume ’s Philosophy , Oxford: Oxford
University Press.
(2015), Hume , New York: Routledge.
Gendler, Tamar Szab /C19o and Hawthorne, John (2002), Conceivability and Possibility ,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Gotterbarn, Donald (1974), “Kant, Hume and Analyticity ”,Kant-Studien 65(1–4), pp.
274–83.
Hale, Bob (1987), Abstract Objects , Oxford: Blackwell.
Hausman, Alan (1967), “Hume ’s Theory of Relations ”,No^us1(3), pp. 255 –82.
Holden, Thomas (2014), “Hume ’s Absolute Necessity ”,Mind 123(490), pp. 377 –413.
Hume, David, philosophical works all provided online, with references as speci ﬁed
below and search facilities, at www.davidhume.org.
(1739/40), A Treatise of Human Nature: A Critical Edition , vol. 1, ed. David Fate
Norton and Mary J. Norton, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2007; references indicated by
“T”and given to book, part, section and paragraph number.
(1740), An Abstract of ...A Treatise of Human Nature , included in both Hume
(1739/40) and Hume (1748); references indicated by “A”and given to paragraph
number.
62 PETER MILLICAN(1745), A Letter from a Gentleman to his Friend in Edinburgh , included in Hume
(1739/40); references indicated by “L”, and given to paragraph number.
(1748/77), An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding , ed. Peter Millican,
Oxford University Press, 2007; references indicated by “E”and given to section and
paragraph number (however the page number is used to refer to the E1.14 textual
variant reproduced in this edition at pp. 177 –8).
(1751/72), An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals , ed. Tom L.
Beauchamp, Oxford University Press, 1998; references indicated by “M”, and given
to section and paragraph number.
(1757/72), A Dissertation on the Passions and The Natural History of Religion: A
Critical Edition , ed. Tom L. Beauchamp, Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2007 (references
to Dissertation indicated by “P”, and given to section and paragraph number).
(1779), Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion , Edinburgh: no publisher named;
provided online at www.davidhume.org; references indicated by “D”and given to
section and paragraph number.
(1932), The Letters of David Hume , ed. J. Y. T. Greig, 2 vols, Oxford: Clarendon
Press (references indicated by “HL”).
Hutcheson, Francis (1742/44), Synopsis of Metaphysics , translated by Michael
Silverthorne, in Hutcheson, Logic, Metaphysics, and the Natural Sociability of
Mankind, eds James Moore and Michael Silverthorne, Indiana: Liberty Fund, 2006.
Kail, P. J. E. (2003), “Conceivability and Modality: A Lemma in an Argument in
Defense of Skeptical Realism ”,Hume Studies 29(1), pp. 43 –61.
(2007a), Projection and Realism in Hume ’s Philosophy , Oxford: Oxford University
Press.
(2007b), “How to Understand Hume ’s Realism ”, in Rupert Read and Kenneth A.
Richman (eds), The New Hume Debate , revised edition, London: Routledge, pp.
253–69.
Kant, Immanuel (1781/87), Critique of Pure Reason , translated by Norman Kemp Smith,
Macmillan, second edition with corrections, 1933 ( “Critique ”).
(1783), Prolegomena to any Future Metaphysics that will be Able to Present Itself
as a Science , translated by Peter G. Lucas, Manchester University Press, 1953
(“Prolegomena ”).
(1786), Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science , translated by Michael
Friedman, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004 ( “Foundations ”).
Kemp Smith, Norman (1941), The Philosophy of David Hume , London: Macmillan.
Kripke, Saul (1980), Naming and Necessity , Blackwell, revised and enlarged edition
(original edition was 1972).
Kuehn, Manfred (1983), “Kant ’s Conception of ‘Hume ’s Problem ’”,Journal of the
History of Philosophy 21(2), pp. 175 –93.
Lightner, D. Tycerium (1997), “Hume on Conceivability and Inconceivability ”,Hume
Studies 23(1), pp. 113 –32.
Locke, John (1690/1700), An Essay Concerning Human Understanding , ed. P. H.
Nidditch, Clarendon Press, 1975 ( “Essay ”).
McDowell, John (1984), “De Re Senses ”,Philosophical Quarterly 34(136), pp. 283 –94.
Merivale, Amyas (2009), “Hume ’s Mature Account of the Indirect Passions ”,Hume
Studies 35(1–2), pp. 185 –210.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 63Millican, Peter (1990), “Content, Thoughts, and De ﬁnite Descriptions ”,Proceedings of
the Aristotelian Society , Supplementary Volume 64, pp. 167 –203; to avoid serious
printing errors, please consult online version at http://www.millican.org/papers/
1990Content.pdf.
(1995), “Hume ’s Argument concerning Induction: Structure and Interpretation ”,i n
Stanley Tweyman (ed.), David Hume: Critical Assessments , New York: Routledge,
vol. 2, pp. 91 –144.
(1996), Hume, Induction, and Probability , University of Leeds PhD thesis, available
online at http://www.davidhume.org/papers/millican.html (along with most of my
other Hume papers).
(2002), “Hume ’s Sceptical Doubts concerning Induction ”, in Millican (ed.),
Reading Hume on Human Understanding , Oxford: Clarendon Press, pp. 107 –73.
(2007a), “Humes Old and New: Four Fashionable Falsehoods, and One
Unfashionable Truth ”,Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society , Supplementary
Volume 81, pp. 163 –99.
(2007b), “Against the ‘New Hume ’”, in Rupert Read and Kenneth A. Richman
(eds), The New Hume Debate , revised edition, New York: Routledge, pp. 211 –52.
(2009), “Hume, Causal Realism, and Causal Science ”,Mind 118(471), pp. 647 –712.
(2011), “Twenty Questions about Hume ’s‘Of Miracles ’”, in Anthony O ’Hear (ed.),
Philosophy and Religion: Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement 68, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press, pp. 151 –92.
(2012a), “Hume ’s‘Scepticism ’about Induction ”, in Alan Bailey and Dan O ’Brien
(eds), The Continuum Companion to Hume , London: Continuum, pp. 57 –103.
(2012b), “Hume ”, in Tom Angier (ed.), Ethics: The Key Thinkers , New York:
Bloomsbury Academic, pp. 105 –31.
Nagel, Thomas (1974), “What is it Like to Be a Bat? ”,Philosophical Review 83(4), pp.
435–50.
Owen, David (1999), Hume ’s Reason , Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Pap, Arthur (1944), “The Different Kinds of A Priori ”,Philosophical Review 53(5), pp.
465–84.
Passmore, John (1980), Hume ’s Intentions , London: Duckworth, third edition ( ﬁrst
edition was 1952).
Pollock, John L. (1974), Knowledge and Justi ﬁcation , Princeton: Princeton University
Press.
Putnam, Hilary (1975), “The Meaning of ‘Meaning ’”, in K. Gunderson (ed.), Language,
Mind and Knowledge , University of Minnesota Press, pp. 131 –93 and reprinted in
Putnam, Mind, Language and Reality (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
1979), pp. 215 –71.
Quine, Willard V. O. (1943), “Notes on Existence and Necessity ”,Journal of Philosophy
40, pp. 113 –27.
(1953), “Two Dogmas of Empiricism ”,i n From a Logical Point of View ,
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, pp. 20 –46.
Richard, Mark (2006), “Propositional Attitude Ascription ”, in Michael Devitt and
Richard Hanley (eds), The Blackwell Guide to the Philosophy of Language , Oxford:
Blackwell, pp. 186 –211.
64 PETER MILLICANRobinson, J. A. (1962), “Hume ’s Two De ﬁnitions of Cause ”,Philosophical Quarterly
12, pp. 162 –71, reprinted in Vere Chappell (ed.), Hume, London: Macmillan, 1966,
pp. 129 –47.
Schliesser, Eric (2007), “Two De ﬁnitions of ‘Cause ’, Newton, and the Signi ﬁcance of
the Humean Distinction between Natural and Philosophical Relations ”,Journal of
Scottish Philosophy 5(1), pp. 83 –101.
Schiffer, Stephen (2008), “Propositional Content ”, in Ernest Lepore and Barry C. Smith
(eds), The Oxford Handbook of Philosophy of Language , Oxford: Clarendon Press,
pp. 267 –94.
Smit, Houston (2010), “Apriority, Reason, and Induction in Hume ”,Journal of the
History of Philosophy 48(3), pp. 313 –43.
Stove, D. C. (1973), Probability and Hume ’s Inductive Scepticism , Oxford: Clarendon
Press.
Strawson, Galen (1989), The Secret Connexion: Causation, Realism, and David Hume ,
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Summer ﬁeld, Donna (1991), “Modest A Priori Knowledge ”,Philosophy and
Phenomenological Research 51(1), pp. 39 –66.
Williamson, Timothy (2006), “Conceptual Truth ”,Proceedings of the Aristotelian
Society ,Supplementary Volume 80, pp. 1 –41.
Woolhouse, Roger (1972), “From Conceivability to Possibility ”,Ratio 14(2), pp. 144 –54.
Wright, John P. (1983), The Sceptical Realism of David Hume , Manchester: Manchester
University Press.
HUME ’S FORK, AND HIS THEORY OF RELATIONS 65