PP. 81–106
EUROPEAN JOURNAL FOR  
PHILOSOPHY OF RELIGION  
Vol 9, No 3 (2017)  
DOI: 10.24204/EJPR.V9I3.1996
AUTHOR: PETER.MILLICAN@HERTFORD.OX.AC.UKDEFENDING THE COMMON-CORE/DIVERSITY 
DILEMMA: ONE AUTHOR’S REPLY TO 
ABRAM, HEIM, LUKASIEWICZ, MOSER, OPPY, 
SALAMON, SENOR, TALIAFERRO & POROT
Peter Millican
Hertford College, Oxford
Branden Thornhill-Miller and I feel tremendously grateful — and hon -
oured — to have received so many interesting and thoughtful critical re -
sponses to our paper on “The Common-Core/Diversity Dilemma” (hence -
forth “CCDD ”). In writing it, we hoped to provoke discussion and debate, but 
could not expect that it would provoke so much, and so quickly. As our critics 
have appreciated, the paper was also itself a product  of discussion and debate, 
with the two of us trying to find a position, or range of positions, that we 
could agree fell within the “rational limits of supernatural belief ” ( CCDD , 2). 
This involved significant compromise on both sides, and hence it would be a 
mistake for any reader to assume that all of the views expressed in the paper 
can be unequivocally attributed to either of us. At some points, indeed, we felt 
compelled to highlight that we were attracted towards significantly different 
paths (2, 5, 46–9), with my own tendency being towards scepticism and natu -
ralism “in the spirit of David Hume” (2), and thus inclined “to ‘bite the bullet’ 
of cool, parsimonious reason and learn to live with a godless world” (46).
1. EMPATHY, AND LOSS OF FAITH
In at least one case, namely that of the Fine Tuning Argument (to be discussed 
in §3 below), this context puts me in the unusual situation of being obliged 
to defend as rationally respectable  a position of which I am seriously sceptical 
on intellectual grounds. To be clear in advance, therefore, I do not find this 
argument persuasive, but it does seem to me legitimately to raise significant PETER MILLICAN82
questions that invite (but do not compel) a divine answer. CCDD ’s references 
to this argument came from me rather than my co-author,1 and are there 
because I cannot imagine personally maintaining a belief in a divine creator 
without being able to draw on some respectable evidence that can survive 
critical scrutiny (as, I believe, the vast majority of other theistic arguments 
and supposed evidence cannot, a topic obviously too big to address further 
here).2 Many people are — for good or ill — less scrupulous in this respect, 
but many of my philosophical colleagues would no doubt insist on being sig -
nificantly more scrupulous.3 Again, I should stress that my own inclinations 
are in the latter direction: we philosophers tend to view it as desirable to base 
our theoretical views on (what we take to be) fully rational criteria, and are 
systematically enculturated towards doing so. But in responding to those who 
would criticise our paper for failing to stick to such a strong “rationalist” line, 
I would ask them to imagine the situation of someone who is persuaded by 
the sceptical case but psychologically unable to maintain this; for whom the 
prospect of casting off all supernatural religious belief seems too much to 
bear, potentially undermining both their optimism about the universe, and 
also — perhaps just as significantly — their social context.
Those who have never fallen under the spell of religion might find it sur -
prising how traumatic relinquishing it can be, even for those whose ideals are 
strongly committed to rationality. My own experience of this was probably 
relatively mild, because it occurred whilst I was still young, in response to a 
combination of factors that came together when I was an undergraduate. As 
1 Obviously. no implications can be drawn regarding Branden Thornhill-Miller’s beliefs 
from my own views as expressed in this current reply to critics. But the example given here 
makes clear that even views suggested in the jointly-authored CCDD  cannot be assumed to be 
those of either of us individually: the paper involved a great deal of discussion and compro -
mise, to endeavour to reach — as far as possible — positions that both of us felt were rationally 
sustainable given the philosophical and psychological evidence. Not surprisingly, the philo -
sophical sections II and III (and 46–7 of VIII) mainly reflect my work, while sections IV to VII 
(and the rest of VIII), focused on empirical and religious studies, mainly reflect my co-author’s 
work. However we discussed and agreed the paper throughout.
2 This answers Taliaferro and Porot: “We are sceptical of the idea that one can reasonably 
appreciate the individual and social benefits of a belief system without seeing any legitimate 
merit to the content of those beliefs. ... We don’t assume that TMM necessarily share this intui -
tion, but we would like to know whether or not they do. ” (228).
3 As, for example, Moser (38–9).DEFENDING THE COMMON-CORE/DIVERSITY DILEMMA: ONE AUTHOR’S REPLY83
a keen and highly involved Anglican, I was shocked on encountering funda -
mentalist believers at Oxford, and the discovery that otherwise highly intel -
ligent people could reflectively endorse — as literal truth — the moral atroci -
ties and fanciful tales of the Old Testament, made me ponder more seriously 
than ever before whether my own religious beliefs were reasonably founded. 
I decided to change subject (from Mathematics) to Philosophy and Theology 
to sort myself out, after which various events jolted me out of my middle-
class complacency into realising how awful the world is for so many people, 
bringing a new vividness to the Problem of Evil. The theological answers were 
unconvincing under critical scrutiny, as were the philosophical theistic argu -
ments, while David Hume’s Dialogues concerning Natural Religion  made many 
of them seem not only inadequate, but risible. By the time I was studying Phi -
losophy of Religion as an Oxford postgraduate, my theism was evaporating, 
but — crucially — my nominal Christianity remained, at least for a few years. 
When my turn came at a postgraduate seminar, I presented a paper arguing 
that the sincere Christian should be prepared to accept the non-existence of 
God if that was where the evidence pointed (an idea received more warmly 
by the Professor of Theology than by the Professor of Philosophy of Reli -
gion). Even after moving on to teaching posts elsewhere, I continued to at -
tend church erratically, until the recitation of creeds (whose dubious history 
I had studied) became just too much to tolerate. Acknowledging that I could 
no longer call myself a Christian was a serious personal ordeal, even when it 
was based on so much study and thought, and even though I had most of my 
life ahead of me, with virtually none of my new social context threatened by 
my loss of faith. Against this background, I find it relatively easy to empathise 
with those who feel that their religious commitments, entwined within their 
lives over decades, are completely impossible to relinquish, whatever con -
trary theoretical arguments might be presented.
2. BENEFITS OF RELIGION WITHOUT FIRST-ORDER BELIEF?
Perhaps the most controversial suggestion in our paper was the idea that 
what we call “second-order” religious belief could provide some kind of mid -
dle ground here, preserving some of the social and psychological benefits of 
religion while abandoning the specific “first-order” religious beliefs that are PETER MILLICAN84
undermined by the Common-Core/Diversity Dilemma. This idea was treated 
with great scepticism by most of our critics (Heim, 253–4; Łukasiewicz, 223; 
Moser, 38–39; Oppy, 262–3; Salamon, 216–30; Taliaferro & Porot, 228–30), 
and though sympathetic to such scepticism, I take seriously the possibility 
that second-order religion could indeed suffice to bring such benefits, since 
I am unaware of empirical evidence that would show otherwise.4 Religions 
come in many varieties (as Oppy stresses in response to Salamon, 260–2), and 
plenty of people apparently find comfort in superstitious beliefs that would 
not count as religious . Many believers might well identify with Salamon’s view 
that takes ethics as central to the role of religion (to be discussed in §4 below), 
but this is by no means universal. Many people also express what might be 
called “metaphysical” yearnings, for the idea that this world and mortal life 
are not “all there is”: that the world is not merely material, and there is some -
thing beyond or some deeper purpose to it all (whether or not this conforms 
to any ethical ideal). Moreover such feelings need not be selfish , in the sense 
of yearning for a heavenly future state. It is commonplace for people to devote 
their lives to their ideals, and even to sacrifice their lives where necessary, an 
observation not confined to those who expect posthumous reward.
I fully acknowledge that second-order religion as we presented it is likely 
to be seen as somewhat elitist, “thin” (Salamon, 199; Moser, 38), and “exis -
tentially irrelevant” (Salamon, 225), especially if it is interpreted rigorously, 
refraining from any first-order “contamination” . But that is not the interpre -
tation we were proposing: we were not suggesting a complete divorce from 
culturally-conditioned religious practices, but rather, that such religious ex -
pression should be followed in an “undogmatic and non-prejudicial” spirit 
(48).5 Many religious believers, especially perhaps in the Far East beyond 
the hegemony of the dominant and exclusivist monotheisms, participate in 
4 But I make no claim to special expertise here, and will be interested to see the response of 
my co-author to relevant points, e.g. McCauley’s work as discussed by Heim (250–3).
5 It may be that several critics have been misled by an unfortunate ambiguity in the text of 
our paper, where we refer to “second-order theism — or deism — ... ” (4). For example, Oppy 
(259) and Senor (221, n. 5) both read this, not unreasonably, as implying an equation  between 
second-order theism and deism, but our intention here was to refer to “second-order (theism 
or deism)” , to clarify that deism was included  within the category (but not required ). Moser 
(37) also misinterprets our notion of second-order religion, in presuming that it must be en -
tirely non-causal.DEFENDING THE COMMON-CORE/DIVERSITY DILEMMA: ONE AUTHOR’S REPLY85
combinations of religious practices that are, strictly viewed, incoherent, and 
often, at least in part, “vulgarly superstitious” .6 Buddhism is combined with 
worshipping the idols of Hinduism or Shinto, for example, apparently meet -
ing both the social and “existential” needs of those concerned, despite the 
theoretical shortcomings.7 At the other extreme from vulgar superstition, 
Christian Quakerism involves no exclusivist creed, and those involved prob -
ably have a wide variety of incompatible views on the status of Jesus and other 
controversial doctrines. It would presumably be possible for religions in gen -
eral to move away from dogmatic expression of beliefs and enforced theolog -
ical purity, to put more emphasis on the social and ceremonial side, and far 
less on doctrinal orthodoxy.8 This might then enable adherents to experience 
personal fulfilment through a range of “valid spiritual paths” , without any 
focus on the incompatibility of their “presume[d] metaphysical conditions” 
(Heim, 247, nn. 35, 37).
Now imagine a participant in such a religious group, who starts with 
doubts about particular historical teachings and eventually becomes scep -
tical about whether there is even any supernatural agency in the universe. 
One can imagine their feeling somewhat conflicted about religious partici -
pation, even of the undogmatic kind. Suppose that they later become con -
vinced — through the Fine Tuning Argument, perhaps — that there is some 
ultimate Designer, albeit one of whom we can know virtually nothing, but 
who can, not unreasonably, be taken as the implicit focal point of many re -
ligions. My expectation is that this new conviction could make a significant 
difference to such a person, helping to remove their conflicted concerns by 
giving them confidence that “there is something more” to the universe, and 
6 Oppy remarks that “Since Hume wrote his Natural History of Religion , it has been a com -
monplace that ‘vulgar superstitions’ are much better suited to the relief of existential anxiety 
than are the abstruse deliverances of theologians. ” (262–3).
7 Heim also draws attention to this phenomenon (247), apparently viewing it as in tension 
with our view, which I do not. The only mention of “polytheism” in our paper suggested that 
it would be unattractive to “any conventional Jew, Christian, or Muslim” (17); perhaps our 
understanding of what counts as “conventional” differs here.
8 This coheres with Oppy’s suggestion that first-order religion could move towards less au -
thoritative forms that “might be able to deliver the in-group goods without also delivering the 
out-group damage” (271–2). But note also that undogmatic first-order religious institutions 
are entirely compatible with individual second-order belief.PETER MILLICAN86
hope of a positive purpose to it all.9 And although I would not now see myself 
as being that person, I can imagine an alternative history in which I might 
have found significant consolation in such a resolution.10
3. THE FINE TUNING ARGUMENT
In support of our conception of second-order religion, our paper put a mod -
est emphasis on the Fine Tuning Argument, with one brief mention in the 
abstract (1), three sentences in the introduction (3–4), and a paragraph and 
footnote in the concluding section (47). This makes a striking contrast with 
its relative prominence in the critical responses, where — compared to our 
total of four occurrences — the phrase “fine tuning” (and cognates) appear 
five times in Senor’s, 15 times in Moser’s, 29 times in Oppy’s and 47 times in 
Salamon’s. Per page, these four responses give an overall frequency more than 
12 times our own, strongly suggesting that more is being read into our nod 
towards this argument than we intended. Accordingly, Salamon states that 
our conception of second-order religion is “supposed to be ... supported solely  
by the Fine-Tuning Argument for the existence of God” (199, his emphasis). 
Abram likewise says that such belief “would rely on the Fine-Tuning Argu -
ment alone” (239). Senor says of us: “The ground of such belief, they aver, is 
the fine-tuning argument” (214). Oppy is initially more guarded (259–60), 
but later describes us as proposing “a second-order religion that is strongly 
supported by fine-tuning considerations” (264).
What we actually said, however, was that second-order religion “can be 
given some distinctive (albeit controversial) intellectual support through the 
increasingly popular Fine Tuning Argument” (1); that “Second-order theism 
is ... likely to be particularly attractive to adherents of the Fine-Tuning Ar -
9 This expectation reflects the view — based on psychological evidence and the study of 
world religions — of my co-author, Branden Thornhill-Miller, who plans to elaborate on sec -
ond-order religion and its implications in a future paper.
10 Late in my teens, largely under the influence of an inspirational vicar, I contemplated a ca -
reer in the Church. Suppose this had come to pass, and that religious doubts had only occurred 
to me when I was settled as a priest, part of a community and with a family to support, feeling 
highly fulfilled by helping others through my pastoral work and with no other career in sight. In 
that case, I could easily have been strongly attracted towards religious viewpoints which — as an 
academic philosopher — I have the luxury of viewing as insufficiently intellectually rigorous.DEFENDING THE COMMON-CORE/DIVERSITY DILEMMA: ONE AUTHOR’S REPLY87
gument” (3); and that “the assessment of the argument is disputed, but we 
doubt that it is decisively refutable given the current state of knowledge, as 
long as its conclusion is suitably restricted” (47). This is at best faint praise for 
the argument, and certainly gives no suggestion that it is the only thing that 
second-order religion has going for it.
As already stated, I personally do not find the Fine Tuning Argument 
persuasive, but I am convinced that it is significantly better than most athe -
ist philosophers seem to think (as long as its conclusion is, indeed, suitably 
restricted). Oppy is probably expressing a standard view when he says — hav-
ing apparently agreed with us that Ontological, Cosmological, and Moral 
Arguments are “decisively refutable” — that “there is no reason to suppose 
that extant fine-tuning arguments are in better standing than other kinds of 
theistic arguments (265).11 Moser is less explicit, but refers to a well-known 
paper that expresses “various serious objections” to the argument (34).12 In 
favour of the argument, we raised the possibility that “in the future — pos-
sibly a distant future — the development of physics [may] strengthen ... the 
argument, for example by ... corroborating the naturalistic inexplicability of 
the ‘anthropic coincidences’” (47).
To flesh out this speculation, suppose that by 1,000 years’ time, physics 
has long since consolidated and removed all the irritating conflicts and lacu -
nae that currently bedevil it. For at least 500 of those years, there has been 
no hint of contradiction between the successors of quantum mechanics and 
general relativity, while the material and forces in the universe have also ap -
11 The phrase “decisively refutable” is our own (47). Oppy himself says that the Ontological, 
Cosmological, and Moral Arguments are “unsuccessful” , and adds that he takes this to be true 
also “for all the other classes of extant theistic arguments” (265).
12 These “serious” objections are mainly based on considerations of mathematical probabil -
ity that bear little relation to the physics, and seem to me implausible. There are, of course, 
obvious difficulties in applying probability rigorously to the unique case of the creation of the 
universe, but in the sort of scenario I sketch below, such absolute theoretical rejection would I 
believe seem unconvincing. Any objection purporting to show that an inference to divine ac -
tion would be unjustified no matter how extreme the phenomena may be  has to be viewed with 
extreme suspicion (and in general, the most effective way of opposing Design Arguments is 
not to rule them out on principle, but rather, to acknowledge that they could have force if the 
empirical evidence were sufficiently impressive, but to point out that it isn’t). To be fair to the 
paper in question, these issues are recognised towards the end (Colyvan et al.  2005, 332).PETER MILLICAN88
parently become well understood.13 The formation of the universe is also well 
understood in terms of the relevant laws, starting from a “Big Bang” with spe -
cific initial conditions, and developing through time towards our recognis -
able future with corroborative evidence at every main stage. Physical expla -
nation, however, is still incomplete: many “anthropic coincidences” remain, 
with apparently arbitrary constants — all of which have resisted deeper at -
tempts at explanation — fitting together in ways that seem precisely adjusted 
to enable the evolution of a complex universe with galaxies, stars, planets, and 
chemistry capable of supporting life (through mechanisms that are again by 
now well understood). Strikingly, no such “coincidence” becomes apparent 
within these theories until billions of years have elapsed after the Big Bang: 
what stands out as remarkable is not the early part of this journey, but the 
long-term end result of the interaction of all these laws. Way back in the 21st 
century, various theories were proposed to explain this apparent fine tuning 
as a selection effect, by speculating about evolving sequences of universes or 
an infinite “world ensemble” , but these have all long since proved untena -
ble.14 Meanwhile, the development of computation has proceeded apace, with 
quantum computers — hugely improved since their initial mass-production 
more than 950 years earlier — now able to simulate alternative physical theo -
ries with unparalleled speed and accuracy. Again and again these simulations 
give the same message: across a huge range of such theories, with the relevant 
13 This is emphatically not the current situation. The existence of “dark matter” was corrobo -
rated only in 1980, and the first direct evidence for “dark energy” came only in 1998. We still 
don’t have much clue what either of these are (assuming they genuinely exist), but analysis of 
seven years of data from NASA ’s Wilkinson Microwave Anisotropy Probe, released in January 
2010, suggests that 72.8% of the mass of the universe is constituted by dark energy, and 22.7% 
by dark matter. That leaves only 4.56% of atomic matter, the stuff that we knew to exist prior 
to 1980. The very recent development, uncertainty, and even internal contradictions of current 
physics give excellent reason for scepticism  about “fine tuning” , but not for dogmatic rejection  
of the idea.
14 Some may argue that such proof is impossible, but the history of science strongly suggests 
that our imaginations are rather poor at predicting what may or may not become possible 
in the future. In his 1835 Cours de Philosophie Positive , ignorant of the developing science 
of spectroscopy, Auguste Comte notoriously asserted that we could never know the chemi -
cal composition of the stars. Bell’s Theorem gives a more contemporary example, enabling 
the demonstration — through statistical calculation and empirical testing — of a limitation on 
quantum “hidden variable” theories that would probably have seemed to most philosophers 
(including myself) to be impossible to establish.DEFENDING THE COMMON-CORE/DIVERSITY DILEMMA: ONE AUTHOR’S REPLY89
constants varied in trillions of different ways, it has turned out that every 
such constant has to be within a very narrow proportion of the theoretically 
“feasible” range in order to generate anything like a complex chemical uni -
verse. The constants seem to be “fine tuned” , and all attempts to explain this 
fine tuning have utterly failed, over centuries of trying, and while science in 
other respects has been developing fruitfully.
To be clear, I do not personally consider this scenario at all likely, but see 
nothing inconceivable in it.15 And if this were to come about, then it seems 
to me that the remarkable apparent fine-tuning would give at least some evi -
dence for a cosmic intelligent power, one able to plan  and foresee , from the 
time of the Big Bang, how the universe was going to develop over the subse -
quent billions of years. The “coincidence” that seems to demand explanation 
only becomes apparent long after the initial state, and this is a distinctive 
feature of the Fine Tuning Argument that makes it especially suitable for in -
dicating an intelligent , forward-planning agent  (as well as one of cosmic scale). 
Hence it is not merely an update of the traditional Design Argument which 
Hume demolished, but has distinctive virtues.16 Oppy disagrees, deploying a 
standard objection:
On the theistic view, [the fine tuning of the initial causal state] will be a 
matter of God’s initial disposition to create a big-bang universe ... in which 
the fine-tuned constants take the values that they do ... I suspect that most 
theists will favour the view that God’s initial creative disposition is brutely 
contingent — God could have had quite different initial creative dispositions 
and there is nothing that explains why God had the creative dispositions that 
he did rather than [others] ... I prefer the variant of the naturalistic view on 
which the initial state of our universe is brutely necessary ... then the views 
are simply on a par with respect to the virtues of the explanations that they 
give of the fine-tuning of the causal order for life. (266)
15 By contrast, I cannot envisage any future scenario that would vindicate the Ontologi -
cal, Cosmological, or Moral Arguments for God (though future discoveries could make con -
sciousness another interesting field for discussion).
16 Compare the conclusion of Colyvan et al. (2005): “In each epoch, what it is about the 
cosmos that is supposed to warrant the design hypothesis has been different: the mechanistic 
solar system, biological organs, and now: fine tuning. But the fundamental flaws in the design 
argument really have nothing to do with the particular suspect chosen. ... the fine-tuning ver -
sion of the argument is no better than its predecessors” (334).PETER MILLICAN90
This, however, seems to miss the point, because the theist who favours the 
Fine Tuning Argument — while perhaps agreeing that “God could have 
had quite different initial creative dispositions” — will not agree that “there 
is nothing that explains why God had the creative dispositions that he did 
rather than others” . Even if, in some sense, we take as “brute facts” that God is 
omnipotent,17 omniscient, and values loving relationships with sentient crea -
tures, it is not then a further  brute fact — given this overall orientation — that 
he chose to create a universe whose specific physical constants were precisely 
“tuned” in such a way as to facilitate the evolution of such creatures. Hence I 
conclude that the Fine Tuning Argument has more explanatory virtue than 
Oppy suggests, and remains in play as a potential (albeit highly debatable) 
support for second-order theism.
4. SALAMON’S AGATHEISM
Salamon’s “agatheism” provides a fascinating counterpoint to our second-
order religion, focusing on morality as the core notion rather than cosmic 
purpose, but otherwise playing a somewhat similar role. Certainly his vision 
of religions coming together through recognition of a fundamental and en -
lightened moral core is an attractive one, but serious questions arise about its 
supposed basis and viability. There is no space here for the extensive discus -
sion that Salamon’s deep and interesting paper deserves, so I shall confine 
myself to a few brief points, sketching my position fairly forthrightly rather 
than arguing for it with any subtlety.
To begin with, I share Oppy’s scepticism (260–2) that first-order religions 
are, in general, founded on an agatheistic moral view, and am more inclined 
towards Łukasiewicz’s view “that ‘true’ first-order religions are grounded 
mainly in religious authority and in the past” (229). First-order religion is 
largely a confused mess that exhibits far too much respect for ancient and less 
enlightened times, and consequently preserves a legacy which has often been 
strongly conditioned by superstitious stories, historical contingency, and vi -
17 Although it points to cosmic power, the Fine Tuning Argument does not strictly support 
omnipotence . Indeed in general, fine tuning is better evidence for an architect  who is having 
to achieve some task within tight constraints, rather than a creator ex nihilo  who could bring 
about exactly what he wants without any causal limitations.DEFENDING THE COMMON-CORE/DIVERSITY DILEMMA: ONE AUTHOR’S REPLY91
cious battles (either over doctrine, or more obviously for naked power). Ex -
amples of all this are legion, and familiar.
When religion frames so many people’s view of “life, the universe, and 
everything” , it is bound to be closely associated with morality; moreover some 
varieties of religion (and specific religious texts such as Matthew  5–7) indeed 
exhibit great moral enlightenment. But this has not apparently been the main 
driving force of most historical religion, as evidenced by what happens when 
the superstitious stories, theological orthodoxies, and power struggles come 
into opposition with ethical values. Then we end up, for example, with Biblical 
texts in which the first four of the ten commandments all focus on devotion 
to Y ahweh;18 and in which the ultimate crime — punishable through future 
generations — is “the sin of Jeroboam the son of Nebat” , namely setting up 
idols of golden calves in Bethel and Dan (thus depriving Jerusalem of income 
from religious tribute). By contrast, the genocide of six entire nations, simply 
because they inhabit the Promised Land, is not only permitted but positively 
encouraged (and we should not be surprised to discover that Deuteronomy  
20:14–17 has inspired so-called “Islamic State” in some of their atrocities).
If religion were genuinely founded on a moral core, then one would ex -
pect this to be the dominant factor in religious debate and discussion, but 
history tells a very different story. The Reformation was primarily about re -
ligious authority, and in its wake both Catholics and Protestants apparently 
considered it entirely in order — for example in the Thirty Y ears’ War and the 
English Civil War — to kill each other with enthusiasm.19 A similar pattern is 
seen still in Islam, where the ancient conflict between Shia and Sunni (again 
fundamentally about authority) shows no sign of abating, while appeals to 
morally enlightened passages within the Quran  seem largely to fall on deaf 
ears. So far from religion being shaped around moral considerations, brute 
historical fact suggests that there is a lot to be said for Hume’s view that re -
18 The four are: “Y ou shall have no other gods before me”; “Y ou shall not make for yourself an 
idol ... for I ... am a jealous God, punishing children for the iniquity of parents, to the third and 
fourth generation”; “Y ou shall not make wrongful use of the name of the Lord your God”; “Ob -
serve the sabbath day and keep it holy ... a sabbath to the Lord your God” ( Deuteronomy  5: 6–21).
19 Moreover the Thirty Y ears’ War gives a very clear example in which it was religious affilia -
tion that initially triggered the conflict and determined the sides; there is no question of a basis 
in some broader social concern that was independent of religion.PETER MILLICAN92
ligion corrupts  morality, recommending spurious “virtues” , promoting intol -
erance, and encouraging the vices of hypocrisy, self-deception, and simple-
minded credulity.20 Contemporary societies that are politically dominated by 
clergy or religious orthodoxies tell a sorry tale, in line with his pessimistic 
comment that “If the religious spirit be ever mentioned in any historical nar -
ration, we are sure to meet afterwards with a detail of the miseries which at -
tend it. ” ( Dialogues  12.11).
Abram “aims to expand Salamon’s agatheistic position and divert Thorn -
hill-Miller’s and Millican’s attention to the sphere of morality” (240). Having 
acknowledged the sceptical view of Bernard Williams,21 much of the focus 
of her response is to emphasise the power of religion to sustain “conclusive” , 
“unconditional” , “inescapable” commitment “that requires our compliance” 
(244) and enables us to “become passionate about morality” (247). She appar -
ently agrees with Rowan Williams that “to do something [morally] extraor -
dinary ..., one has to subscribe to the idea of a transcendent source of value” 
(245). I am not persuaded by this last claim, since there are plenty of exam -
ples of heroic atheists, and of people who have devoted their lives to values 
without any suggestion of a “transcendent source” . But suppose it were true 
that the absolute heights of heroism empirically went along with religious 
belief — what would follow? Personally, I would rather live in a world with -
out such heroes: where nobody  believes that they have “inescapable” commit -
ments derived from a transcendent source that unconditionally requires their 
compliance (e.g. to become terrorist martyrs). The history of those who are 
“passionate” about their religiously-inspired moral beliefs is depressing rath -
er than uplifting, with religion often serving to harden their hearts against 
more homely secular virtues such as benevolence, empathy, and pity. Voltaire 
had good reason to stress how unnatural religious views can lead to unnatu -
ral acts of violence and injustice:
In days gone by, there were people who said to us: ‘Y ou believe in incompre -
hensible, contradictory and impossible things because we have commanded 
you to; now then, commit unjust acts because we likewise order you to do 
so. ’ ... Certainly any one who has the power to make you believe absurdities 
20 For more discussion and references, see Millican (2002), 34–40 and especially 38.
21 She quotes him (242) as remarking that appeal to God in morality “either adds nothing at 
all, or it adds the wrong sort of thing” — a sentiment with which Hume would obviously concur.DEFENDING THE COMMON-CORE/DIVERSITY DILEMMA: ONE AUTHOR’S REPLY93
has the power to make you commit injustices. If you do not use the intel -
ligence with which God endowed your mind to resist believing impossibili -
ties, you will not be able to use the sense of injustice which God planted in 
your heart to resist a command to do evil. Once a single faculty of your soul 
has been tyrannized, all the other faculties will submit to the same fate. This 
has been the cause of all the religious crimes that have flooded the earth. 
(Voltaire 1765, 277–8)
Ridiculous beliefs — for example that forcible religious conversion under tor -
ture can save a soul from eternal damnation, or that martyrdom can gain 
eternal bliss in the company of 72 willing virgins — can very easily lead to un -
speakable acts, as history amply confirms. Morality is far safer if kept beyond 
the grasp of “passionate” religious enthusiasm.
Another serious difficulty for agatheism is the familiar Problem of Evil, 
which threatens to drive a wedge between metaphysics and morals. This is 
too big a topic to embark on here, so I shall simply observe that agatheism 
looks far harder to square with the empirical data than is our second-order 
religion with its ultimate creator (or perhaps fine-tuner) who generally lets 
the world alone. The latter might not offer as much personal support and 
consolation as the view that the world is governed by moral perfection, but 
for those who do find it existentially adequate, it is probably much easier to 
maintain against the hard and depressing evidence of experience.
5. SUPERNATURALISM
Turning now to the more sceptical elements of our paper, Taliaferro and Porot 
take us to task for using the term “supernatural” to characterise our target, for 
three reasons. First, they believe the term “suggests ... a clear understanding 
of what is natural” (215). In my idiolect, however, it suggests no such thing, 
and I agree entirely with the points they make about our contemporary “lack 
of a clear understanding of what is material” (216), and how far modern phys -
ics has moved from early-modern paradigms. Secondly, they take the term 
to imply distortion  or lack compared with the natural (217). Again, I do not 
understand it as having such pejorative overtones, and “ super natural” sounds 
to me like an attribution of something more  than natural, rather than some -PETER MILLICAN94
thing less (a view strongly confirmed by the Oxford English Dictionary).22 
Thirdly, they dislike “the way in which ‘supernatural’ as ... currently defined 
in English, includes not just God ... [but] ghosts, spooks, vampires, telepathy, 
astro-projection, witches, Delphic oracles, dead ancestral spirits, poltergeists, 
and so on” (217). This requires more discussion.
In the first sentence of our Introduction, we characterised our topic as 
“belief in supernatural agents such as gods, angels, and spirits”; we then spoke 
of “such invisible powers” and “instances of perceived supernatural agency” . 
Given this focus, two reasonable alternatives to the word “supernatural” 
would be Hume’s term, “invisible, intelligent powers” , or — perhaps prefer -
ably for Taliaferro and Porot — “incorporeal agents” . Now I take it that incor -
poreal agency can reasonably be considered as “supernatural” in the sense 
of being in radical tension with our scientific understanding of the natural 
world. The limits of physical matter admittedly remain very unclear, poten -
tially embracing “psychic” qualities (with panpsychism now taken seriously 
by a fair number of philosophers); this indeed makes terms such as “physi -
calism” and “naturalism” hard to pin down. But as far as I know there has 
been no serious scientific  evidence of agents that are entirely incorporeal ; and 
the belief that such agents exist remains clearly in the religious (and perhaps 
parapsychological) rather than scientific domain, completely dissociated from 
our developing understanding of biology, evolution, and the mechanisms of 
human thought and action. This is not, of course, to presume that it is false or 
universally rejected by scientists; but in general parlance incorporeal agents 
would count as “supernatural” if anything does.23 Talk of incorporeal agents 
will also embrace some of the occult entities whose company Taliaferro and 
Porot resent (though by no means all of them: vampires and telepathy, for 
example, need involve no such agency). I can understand why they dislike 
belief in God being put alongside belief in dead ancestral spirits and so forth, 
but those do all happen to be instances of the topic under discussion. And it is 
22 The non-obsolete OED definitions of the adjective are “1(a) Belonging to a realm or system 
that transcends nature , as that of divine , magical, or ghostly beings  ... ”; “1(b) Relating to, dealing 
with, or characterized by such a realm, system, or force”; and “2. More than what is natural or 
ordinary; unnaturally or extraordinarily great ; abnormal, extraordinary. ” (my emphasis).
23 As the OED  clearly confirms. And again, most would consider the power to act without a 
body a superpower  rather than a limitation.DEFENDING THE COMMON-CORE/DIVERSITY DILEMMA: ONE AUTHOR’S REPLY95
indeed an implication of our view that some of the processes that lead to belief 
in divine action lead also to belief in ancestral spirits and witchcraft that most 
would regard as “superstitious” . I acknowledge that “there is a tendency to as -
sociate what is supernatural with that which is superstitious” (218), but on our 
view, such an association is not entirely inappropriate: if the same psychologi -
cal processes are, indeed, involved in both, then that is highly relevant to their 
assessment. Overall, therefore, I am unconvinced by any objection of principle 
to the term “supernatural” , and from a stylistic point of view, “supernatural 
belief ” seems clearly preferable to “belief in incorporeal agency” . I also note 
that our other critics raised no objection to the term, and indeed used it them -
selves. But just to be very clear, our use of the term “supernatural” is not in any 
way intended to function as a persuasive definition : the issues we raise are to 
be decided by discussion and argument, not by verbally enshrined prejudices.
6. HUME ON MIRACLES
I hold no brief to defend Hume against the charge of racism, though Taliafer -
ro and Porot overstate it unfairly.24 And I am prepared to accept that his ap -
parent unwillingness here to accept phenomena beyond his experience may 
suggest parallels with his view on miracles.25 Moreover I agree with Taliaferro 
and Porot that Hume’s confusing discussion of “his case of world-wide to -
tal darkness” (221), and his failure to link the issue of miracles more clearly 
with the idea of divine teleology  (222), are serious weaknesses.26 But I take 
issue with Taliaferro and Porot’s discussion of contrary miracles. They are in 
24 They say, for example, that Hume “grants [Willams] no more skills than a parrot” (220), 
which would of course be both ridiculous and extremely offensive. Hume actually says that 
Williams is “likely ... admired for very slender accomplishments” , in much the same way as a 
parrot can be admired for “speak[ing] a few words plainly” . What count as “very slender ac -
complishments” for humans and parrots are clearly quite different, and Hume expresses no 
doubt that Williams has some “parts and learning” by comparison with other Jamaicans.
25 Just as Taliaferro and Porot should acknowledge the equally obvious parallels between 
religious and “superstitious” beliefs involving incorporeal agents. Note that if, as they claim, 
“Hume seems just as ready to dismiss reports of intelligent blacks as to dismiss miracle stories 
due to an errant imagination or … cognitive biases” (220), then this makes his undervaluing 
of the evidence for black people’s accomplishments more a cognitive than a moral failing.
26 Both points are made very explicitly in Millican (2011), §18 (182–4) — this paper is re -
ferred to several times in CCDD  (see footnotes 11, 13, 14, and 15).PETER MILLICAN96
danger of misrepresenting us when they refer to “TMM’s revision of Hume’s 
critique of miracles” and then go on to state a view, supposedly “ As [TMM] 
phrased it” (223), which looks very like the Humean position that we were 
explicitly criticising  (on 15–16). We ourselves said:
Hume goes much too far when arguing that miracles ‘pretended to have 
been wrought’ in contrary religions are ‘to be regarded as contrary facts’ . ... 
Indeed, as we have seen, M1 and M2 need not be ‘contrary’ even in the weak 
sense of merely making each other less probable , despite the strict contrari -
ety of their associated religions, R1 and R2. (16)
Against this background, it seems strange that Taliaferro and Porot should 
argue so forcefully towards the conclusion: “To say that incoherence between 
doctrines establishes that the miracle did not happen, even when all … faiths 
could (in principle) agree that it did, is misguided. ” (224). We agree, and we 
never said — or even suggested — any such thing.
A more substantial disagreement emerges when Taliaferro and Porot ad -
dress the issue of whether believers can “rationally reject the miracles of other 
faiths without rejecting the miracles of their own faith” (226), but here I be -
lieve they have overlooked the force of our argument. Their concern seems 
to be to establish the potential for asymmetries  between different religions 
based on the content of the relevant beliefs (e.g. moral egalitarianism versus 
hierarchy), and they point out correctly that “it seems perfectly coherent for a 
believer to say that they don’t believe the testimony of a miracle for a religion 
that generates other false claims” (225). This, of course, is exactly  the sort of 
reasoning that Hume was proposing regarding “contrary miracles”: rejecting 
miracle stories on the basis that the corresponding religion is presumed to 
be false. And so ironically Taliaferro and Porot are now apparently lining up 
on Hume’s side, in favour of a kind of reasoning on which we were casting 
doubt (though on the basis of probabilistic considerations rather than alleged 
incoherence).
In our discussion of “contrary miracles” , we were not denying that a be -
liever might justifiably draw distinctions between miracle stories in different 
religions, and indeed the question of justification  here is irrelevant. Taliaferro 
and Porot (225) quote us as saying:
The point here is not that Christian believers are logically compelled to deny  
the miracles of rival religions (as the contrary religions argument would DEFENDING THE COMMON-CORE/DIVERSITY DILEMMA: ONE AUTHOR’S REPLY97
suggest), but rather, that these believers will in fact want to deny  them. 
(CCDD , 19)
Our denial of logical compulsion here was made against Hume , as the paren -
thesis makes very clear. And our point was that, notwithstanding this lack of 
compulsion, most believers would in fact  deny the miracle stories of other 
religions. Whether or not this denial would be justified , such religious believ -
ers would then be faced with a host of miraculous reports from a multitude 
of religions, the vast majority of which they consider to be false . This would im -
mediately imply that miracle reports are statistically very unreliable. It would 
also raise the question of how these false reports came about, with a very 
plausible explanation being that “humans are naturally drawn towards belief 
in the supernatural, with a vivid imagination driven by hopes and fears, cog -
nitive biases, lack of critical judgement, and a delight in miracle stories etc. ” 
(17). Both the obvious statistical message, and the naturalistic explanation, 
cast serious doubt not only on the miracle stories of other  religions, but also 
on those of the believer’s religion itself. And thus we reach a clear instance of 
the Common-Core/Diversity Dilemma: “That in so far as ... miracle reports 
... point towards specific aspects of particular religions, their diversity and 
mutual opposition undermines their evidential force; while in so far as [they] 
involve a ‘common core’ of similarity, they point towards a proximate com -
mon cause ... that is natural rather than supernatural. ” (3, 20).
7. RATIONALITY AND OBJECTIVITY
Our discussion raised big questions about rationality and objectivity, and 
many interesting points have been made in response. As Moser (33–5), 
Oppy (268), and Senor (216–20) observe, what it is rational to believe will 
inevitably depend to some extent on the epistemological situation of the in -
dividual believer, and hence we were being imprecise in talking with such 
apparent generality of the “rational limits of supernatural belief ” (2). More 
substantially, it is debatable how far general third-person (e.g. statistical) con -
siderations should be taken into account by the rational subject who has a 
first-person experience as of a supernatural agent, or who receives religious 
testimony from someone he trusts. Taliaferro and Porot suggest that objec -
tive testing — for example of the efficacy of petitionary prayer — is especially PETER MILLICAN98
problematic when God’s existence is in question, given his supposed neces -
sity and omnipresence (226–7).27 They also provide an amusing story of a 
religious experience striking Thornhill-Miller and me whilst walking back 
to Hertford College after giving a paper elsewhere (232–3).28 Senor (217) 
suggests that we are inappropriately assuming “a general parity among the 
practitioners of various religions regarding the experiences they have and the 
beliefs they form on the basis of them” ,29 and argues that testimony can be 
“a rationality conferring process” , even if it cannot ultimately be traced back 
to genuine religious experiences (219–20).30 Moser points out that diversity 
does not necessarily imply disagreement, speculating that “God could issue 
opposing commands to you and me for keeping the Sabbath” , giving us both 
“undefeated evidence” , bearing in mind that “God could have different spe -
27 I suspect, however, that their points about prayer are self-defeating, since if “There is no 
one on earth who is not prayed for” (226) — and if this lack of a control group undermines any 
attempt to test prayer’s efficacy — then it seems to follow that individual prayer (in the context 
of universal collective prayers) has no curative value. They cannot have it both ways: either 
individual  prayer is ineffective, or it has specific good effects that could be detectable.
28 The story somewhat chimes with me, since I have sung the Magnificat  many times in 
the past, and have probably got closest through music — including Church music — to what 
I might be tempted to call a religious experience. But the example has an easy answer: “once 
… supernatural agents (whose veracity cannot be guaranteed) are brought into the picture, it 
becomes obvious that mere humans will be unable to tell with any reliability what source any 
miracle has” ( CCDD , 17 n. 27). The Problem of Evil would strongly dissuade me from accept -
ing any religious experience as involving genuine contact with an omniperfect God, because 
even supernatural beings are to be judged morally by how they act, not by how they choose to 
present themselves to potentially gullible observers.
29 He also suggests that we offer no relevant empirical evidence for this, apparently overlook -
ing the wealth of psychological studies cited in our paper that point towards such commonality.
30 There is, however, a serious problem here. Suppose we accept, with Senor, that “a testifier 
might not be rational in her belief, but sincerely assert that P and a hearer might thereby come 
to rationally believe that P . So, even if TMM’s argument might cause problems for the rational -
ity of specific religions in a general, person-neutral sense, many believers might be rational in 
their beliefs. ” (220). This seems to be presented as a vindication of the potential rationality of 
religious belief. But any victory here is obviously Pyrrhic, for its premise is that rational belief 
can be founded on irrational testimony. On that basis, almost any belief that is not obviously  
false can in principle be rationally held, if based on a confident report from someone who is 
fully trusted but in fact utterly deluded on the matter in question. I therefore think we were 
wise to focus, in CCDD , on the “rational limits of supernatural belief ” from a well-informed 
and intersubjective point of view, rather than that of the individual believer.DEFENDING THE COMMON-CORE/DIVERSITY DILEMMA: ONE AUTHOR’S REPLY99
cific purposes for you and me” (33). Oppy (268–9) and Senor (220) point to 
epistemological externalism as potentially playing a role in these discussions.
Other significant points concern an implicit contrast that we may have 
seemed to assume between religious diversity and an imagined naturalistic 
unanimity. Taliaferro and Porot indeed allege unfairness here, noting the 
considerable diversity between “different naturalistic accounts of human per -
sons” and of “the human mind” (223–4). Such diversity “also concerns deep 
matters in metaphysics, epistemology, value theory, philosophy of language, 
and other sub-fields” (228). In the same vein, Oppy says:
Some, but not all, intelligent, reflective, interested, well-informed philoso -
phers have been, and some, but not all, intelligent, reflective, interested and 
well-informed philosophers are, determinists, substance dualists, conse -
quentialists, communitarians, virtue ethicists, logical pluralists, phenom -
enologists, existentialists, physicalists, legal positivists, and so forth. What 
credence, then, can we give to claims that it is irrational  to believe in deter -
minism, or consequentialism, or communitarianism ... etc.? (269–70)
He also goes on to stress that the “human cognitive failings — egocentric bias, 
confirmation bias, optimistic bias, and the like” that we highlight as an epis -
temological problem with regard to religion “are universal ... So a question 
naturally arises about the extent to which the views of Thornhill-Miller and 
Millican on the question of the rationality of naturalistic and theistic beliefs 
are themselves affected by these universal cognitive failings. ” (270).
All these are interesting questions, deserving of far longer and more de -
tailed answers than I am able to give here.31 But in brief, I continue to think 
that there are special problems with the diversity in religious belief, which 
fully justify the place that we gave it in our paper, and which strongly cohere 
with our emphasis on the Common-Core/Diversity Dilemma. First, the ex -
tent of religious diversity is longstanding, widespread and notorious, charac -
terised by uncompromising and violent disagreement throughout recorded 
history, and relatively little rational engagement. Secondly, and relatedly, the 
31 Other very interesting issues are raised by Heim (249–50) in relation to our discussion of 
the “Normal/Objective Dilemma” , and I regret that lack of space precludes addressing those 
here. One point worth noting, however, is Heim’s approving mention of Damasio’s view “that 
emotion is an integral element in the way ‘higher’ human reason works” (249). As I have noted 
elsewhere (Millican 2002, 425), Damasio’s book in turn approvingly mentions Hume, who in 
this respect yet again achieved insights that were well ahead of his time.PETER MILLICAN100
existential concerns that motivate religion typically give the relevant beliefs 
an intensity out of all proportion to the evidence, making believers peculiarly 
weak at assessing that evidence objectively, and giving religious institutions 
a concern for orthodoxy which often crushes even further any prospect of 
calm, objective reflection. Thirdly, for these and associated reasons, religious 
diversity is deeply entrenched, with rival communities only rarely attempting 
to learn from each other or modify their views: religious affiliation for most 
people is therefore overwhelmingly determined by geography or family com -
munity, rather than by rational investigation or discussion. Fourthly, in so 
far as religion is based on personal experience rather than local tradition or 
teaching, it is clear that such experiences are culturally conditioned, with the 
common underlying features typically interpreted by the believer as having 
doctrinal implications that almost invariably mirror the relevant community. 
Fifthly — as we documented at length — psychological studies clearly suggest 
that several mechanisms that lie behind supernatural religious beliefs also 
commonly lead to superstitious beliefs which defy any rational credibility.
Senor suggests that a religious belief could be justified on externalist 
grounds if “it is the product of a properly functioning, reliable, truth-aimed 
belief-forming process operating in an appropriate environment” (220). 
There are at least two problems with this. First, externalist accounts of justifi -
cation are essentially third-person , based on an outside view of the processes 
involved rather than the believer’s own perspective. These often fit well with 
our everyday ascriptions of knowledge (including to animals and unreflec -
tive people), but they are far less helpful when we ourselves are plagued with 
epistemological doubts. In these circumstances, it is of little help to know that 
if our belief that P is the product of a reliable process operating in a standard 
way, then  it counts as knowledge: our worry is precisely that it might not be 
the product of such a process, and hence would not count as knowledge. Thus 
externalism does not alleviate our epistemological concern, but instead re-
packages it at a higher level: uncertainty over whether P is true  gets replaced 
by uncertainty over whether I know that P . When we seek reflective  knowl -
edge from the first-person point of view, mere externalist considerations are 
not sufficient.
The second problem with relying on externalism here is that the relevant 
belief-forming processes — if individuated in the obvious way — simply are DEFENDING THE COMMON-CORE/DIVERSITY DILEMMA: ONE AUTHOR’S REPLY101
not reliable in general, as the sheer statistics of disagreement indicate clearly.32 
In response, it seems to me to be a desperate expedient to suggest, as Moser 
does, that there “could be a divine purpose for diversity and disagreement 
in religions, and thus the latter need not count against evidence for theis -
tic belief or first-order theistic religion” (39). Suppose, if you will, that God 
has excellent reason (unknown to us) for dividing mankind into ten groups, 
who all receive different and mutually incompatible revelations about the di -
vine nature or the destiny of the universe. Even if God is blameless here (for 
he knows best), this obviously undermines his record as a reliable source of 
truth, when at least 90% of us are told something false.33
The points above suggest some obvious answers to the “partners in crime” 
objection which alleges that the situation in naturalistic philosophy is no bet -
ter than in first-order religion. If it was in fact the case that disagreements in 
epistemology, ethics, or metaphysics persisted, over generations and between 
communities, in the same way as differences in religion, and when they were 
raised, tended to precipitate dogmatic assertion (or special pleading in favour 
of supposedly privileged personal revelations) rather than rational discussion 
(in which the claimed evidence is exposed to critical scrutiny), then I would 
agree wholeheartedly that this gave good reason to withhold confidence from 
32 This does not take for granted that the mere existence of proximate natural causal mecha -
nisms undermines religious beliefs, as Senor (218) and Taliaferro & Porot (230–2) may be pre -
suming. I agree that it would be possible — perhaps even to be expected — for God to exploit 
such mechanisms if he wished to generate religious experiences. But the problem is that these 
mechanisms operate in many cases where the resulting beliefs are clearly unreasonable, thus 
demonstrating their unreliability. A superficially tempting response might be to reconceptual -
ise the mechanisms in such a way that genuine divine initiation becomes treated as definitive  
of them, thus making the relevant type of mechanism an infallible  indicator of God’s presence 
(i.e. if God did not initiate the process, then it should not be counted as an instance of truth -
ful mechanism T). But then we get back to the problem of being unable to tell, from the first-
person point of view of the believer , whether such a divine knowledge-generating mechanism 
is indeed operative, or whether instead it is the (indistinguishable, and apparently far more 
common) delusive variant F, with no deity playing any part in the process.
33 Floating this possibility — of some unknown divine purpose in fostering disagree -
ment — also seems to be in tension with an earlier remark, in which Moser criticised us for 
appealing to a “mere ‘possibility’” on the basis that “a mere possibility does not yield actual 
evidence” (34). As regards that particular case, we should have made clear that the Fine Tuning 
Argument, if accepted , would suggest the consequences we described, having explicitly made 
the point that they were “only to be expected” if “the universe has in fact been finely tuned” (4).PETER MILLICAN102
the relevant beliefs.34 Likewise, if it turned out that particular commonplace 
experiences — for example of intentional action — were standardly interpret -
ed quite differently by members of different philosophical clans, even when 
all the objective data pointed to commonality, then I would refrain from giv -
ing these interpretations any significant evidential weight in respect of the 
crucial disagreements. When matters are genuinely controversial, and objec -
tive evidence is hard to identify, the withholding of assent is not to be regret -
ted: appropriate scepticism can readily be embraced! Oppy’s list of debat -
able philosophical doctrines includes many plausible examples of such cases, 
mostly taken from ethics (e.g. consequentialism, communitarianism, virtue 
ethics, existentialism) and from a range of notoriously difficult areas where 
our attempts to understand the objective and subjective worlds come into 
tension (e.g. determinism, substance dualism, phenomenology, physicalism). 
In the former group, it is unclear that there even exists any objective method 
of resolution (since ethical judgements plausibly require emotional engage -
ment), and many would question whether seeking literal truth  (as opposed, 
say, to culturally sensitive reflective equilibrium) is appropriate. In the latter 
group, not only are the issues complex and interlocking, with questions of de -
batable definition as well as disputed evidence, but also, it often seems likely 
here that our theorising is running well ahead of any solid scientific basis. 
And in all of these areas, our philosophical “intuitions” are so contaminated 
with ancient and modern baggage (much of it associated with religion), that 
it should be no surprise that agreement is hard to reach.35
34 Scepticism should also be extended, of course, to “the views of Thornhill-Miller and Mil -
lican” , if careful analysis yields significant evidence that our arguments are fallacious, perhaps 
owing to the various “universal cognitive failings” that we highlight as promoting supernatural 
beliefs (cf. Oppy 270). The great virtue of debates such as this is precisely to enable the expo -
sure of any fallacies, and to facilitate cleansing of the contending arguments from dependence 
on unnoticed biases or question-begging etc. No procedure can guarantee  achievement of a 
rational outcome in such contentious and difficult matters, but calm, open, reasoned debate 
radically improves the odds.
35 For example, traditional religious beliefs generally go together with an embrace of dualism 
and a rejection of consequentialism and determinism (since the Free Will Defence depends on 
a libertarian account of freedom), as confirmed by the survey results at https://philpapers.org/
surveys/linear_most_with.pl?A=main%3AGod%3Atheism.DEFENDING THE COMMON-CORE/DIVERSITY DILEMMA: ONE AUTHOR’S REPLY103
In other areas of philosophy, less marked by tribal “schools” , there is sub -
stantial progress, and it is achieved largely through dialogue and reasoned 
debate. Most of us agree most of the time, for example, when an argument is 
valid or invalid, when various theories are mutually consistent or inconsist -
ent, and what constitutes a strong point for, or against, some theory. Our 
views on these things are not determined by our upbringing, and we learn 
them at least largely through the development of understanding rather than 
authoritative instruction. A more distinctive but perhaps equally important 
point is that philosophy itself is a very unusual discipline, with a strong tradi -
tion of exploring questions at the frontiers of discovery and understanding. 
Hence it has often been historically the midwife of other disciplines, for ex -
ample physics and political theory in the 17th century (e.g. Galileo, Descartes, 
Hobbes, Locke), and of economics and psychology in the 18th century (e.g. 
Hume, Smith, Hartley). Once such new fields have matured sufficiently to 
have their own established methods of investigation, they typically pass on to 
more specialist thinkers, and cease to count as “philosophy” . Thus the ques -
tions that today count as “philosophical” are typically those that are either 
enduringly difficult and controversial (including questions of value), or those 
that currently lie at the frontiers of investigation (e.g. in the borderlands of 
cognitive science and artificial intelligence).
Philosophy therefore embraces a high proportion of controversial ques -
tions where methods are uncertain, doubt is appropriate and dogmatism is 
not to be trusted. The same of course goes for first-order religion, but here 
there is no such creditable track record of fruitful novelty, rigorous debate, 
and theoretical development down through the ages. Whereas secular phi -
losophy — both natural and social — has delivered impressive change in the 
scientific, political, and ethical arenas over the last 400 years or so, it is only 
relatively recently that the main established religions have even started to 
move away from implausible literalist beliefs (e.g. creation and worldwide 
flood stories) that remained unquestioned for many times longer, even in 
the teeth of discoveries that should have cast serious doubt on them. In the 
moral sphere, they likewise continue to drag their feet, slow as always to re -
consider the prejudices that in the past were used to justify slavery, and more 
recently to reject contraception, homosexuality, assisted death, and much else 
(not to mention specifically religious “crimes” such as apostasy and heresy). PETER MILLICAN104
I conclude that the “partners in crime” defence of first-order religion cannot 
work. But even if it were to succeed in putting philosophy in the same boat, 
the appropriate response would be to extend our scepticism to philosophy, 
not to withdraw it from first-order religion.
In short, therefore, and despite the challenges posed by the very interest -
ing responses discussed here (all too briefly), I believe that the Common-
Core/Diversity Dilemma remains a significant sceptical challenge to first-
order religion.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Abram, Anna. “‘The Maxim of the Moon’ and the Lived Experience of Religious Belief: 
An Ethical Revision of Thornhill-Miller’s and Millican’s Second Order Religion. ” 
European Journal for Philosophy of Religion  8, no. 1 (2016): 239–50. doi:10.24204/
ejpr.v8i1.77.
Colyvan, Mark, Jay L. Garfield, and Graham Priest. “Problems with the Argument 
from Fine Tuning. ” Synthese , no. 145 (2005): 325–38. doi:10.1007/s11229-005-6195-0.
Heim, S. M. “Diverse Religious Experiences and First Order Religious Beliefs. ” 
European Journal for Philosophy of Religion  8, no. 3 (2016): 237–55. doi:10.24204/
ejpr.v8i3.1696.
Łukasiewicz, Dariusz. “ Agathological Rationalism and First-Order Religions. ” 
European Journal for Philosophy of Religion  9, no. 2 (2017): 22–39. doi:10.24204/ejpr.
v9i2.1944.
Millican, Peter, ed. Reading Hume on Human Understanding: Essays on the first 
Enquiry . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002.
Millican, Peter. “Twenty Questions about Hume’s “Of Miracles”” Philosophy and 
Religion; Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement  68, ed. by Anthony O’Hear (2011): 
152–92. doi:10.1017/S1358246111000105.
Moser, Paul K. “First-Order Theistic Religion: Intentional Power Beyond Belief. ” 
European Journal for Philosophy of Religion  9, no.  3 (2017). doi:10.24204/ejpr.
v9i3.1989.
Oppy, Graham. “On Second-Order Religion, Agatheism and Naturalism. A Reply to 
Branden Thornhill-Miller, Peter Millican and Janusz Salamon. ” European Journal for 
Philosophy of Religion  8, no. 3 (2016): 257–72. doi:10.24204/ejpr.v8i3.1697.DEFENDING THE COMMON-CORE/DIVERSITY DILEMMA: ONE AUTHOR’S REPLY105
Salamon, Janusz. “ Atheism and Agatheism in the Global Ethical Discourse: Reply to 
Millican and Thornhill-Miller. ” European Journal for Philosophy of Religion  7, no. 4 
(2015): 197–245. doi:10.24204/ejpr.v7i4.94.
Senor, Thomas D. “Common Core/Diversity Dilemma, Agatheism and the 
Epistemology of Religious Belief. ” European Journal for Philosophy of Religion  8, no. 4 
(2017): 213–26. doi:10.24204/ejpr.v8i4.1764.
Taliaferro, Charles, and Christophe Porot. “ A Defense of First and Second-Order 
Theism: The Limits of Empirical Inquiry and the Rationality of Religious Belief. ” 
European Journal for Philosophy of Religion  8, no. 3 (2016): 213–35. doi:10.24204/
ejpr.v8i3.1695.
Thornhill-Miller, Branden, and Peter Millican. “The Common-Core/Diversity 
Dilemma: Revisions of Humean thought, New Empirical Research, and the Limits of 
Rational Religious Belief. ” European Journal for Philosophy of Religion  7, no. 1 (2015): 
1–49. doi:10.24204/ejpr.v7i1.128.
Torrey, Norman L., ed. Les Philosophes: The philosophers of the Enlightenment and 
modern democracy . New Y ork: Capricorn Books, 1961.
Voltaire, (François-Marie Arouet). [1765] 1961. “Questions on Miracles. ” In Les 
Philosophes: The philosophers of the Enlightenment and modern democracy , edited by 
Norman L. Torrey. New Y ork: Capricorn Books.