Hume Studies
Volume 44, Number 2, 2018, pp. 167–208
Peter Millican is Gilbert Ryle Fellow and Professor of Philosophy at Hertford College, Uni -
versity of Oxford, Catte Street, Oxford, OX1 3BW, United Kingdom. 
Email: peter.millican@hertford.ox.ac.ukHume’s Pivotal Argument, and His 
Supposed Obligation of Reason
PETER MILLICAN
Abstract: Treatise  1.4.1 argues that whenever we assess our probability of error, 
“we are oblig’d by our reason” to consider also the probability of error in that 
assessment, leading to a fatal regress which—but for irresistible nature—would 
extinguish all belief. The argument plays a huge role in the Treatise , and has 
recently attracted many defenders, rejecting the previously standard objection 
that iterated reflection need not imply reduction  of probability. This paper, 
however, presses a more fundamental objection—that there is no obligation 
of reason to iterate in the first place—something obscured by the failure of 
previous analyses to focus on specific examples. Unlike the Treatise , Hume’s 
Enquiry  of 1748 is richly illustrated with examples, making it likely that he 
himself would have encountered these problems. And there are traces in the 
Enquiry  of a fundamental change of view, corroborating the significance of 
this argument for his philosophical development.
Hume’s argument in Treatise  1.4.1, “Of scepticism with regard to reason,” is one of 
the most important in the entire work, setting an extreme sceptical tone which 
persists into the Conclusion of Book 1, and delivering a result that appears to 
wreak havoc there. The significance Hume accords it in 1739 is also witnessed by 
the number of times that he refers or alludes to it in other sections of the Trea -
tise.1 Yet it does not feature in his 1748 Enquiry concerning Human Understanding , 
and became in time (arguably) “the only major argument of Book I of the Treatise  Hume Studies168 Peter Millican
not repeated in his later writings.”2 Accordingly, it was for many years neglected 
by scholars, and omitted from most books on Hume, which typically aspired to 
give a coherent picture of his epistemology that encompassed both the Treatise  
and the Enquiry . Other likely factors here were the argument’s tension with the 
“naturalist” view of Hume popularised by Norman Kemp Smith and later Barry 
Stroud, and its mismatch with the conventional structure of standard topics (ideas, 
induction, causation, external world, and personal identity) around which many 
books on Hume have been organised.3 This neglect, however, came to an end in 
the 1980s, with three authors—Fred Wilson, Richard DeWitt, and Ted Morris—all 
seeking to rehabilitate Hume’s argument against what they considered to be an 
overwhelmingly dismissive orthodoxy,4 and a fourth—Robert Fogelin—treating 
it fully (and fairly sympathetically) within a major book on Hume’s scepticism. 
Since then, there has been an enduring resurgence of interest in, and support for, 
the argument, seemingly putting it on a stronger footing and generating fruitful 
discussion about its place within Hume’s philosophy. Indeed, a clear majority of 
those who have written on the argument over the last few decades have presented 
it as being at least substantially, or potentially, defensible.5
Against this more recent trend, my primary aim in this paper is to highlight 
a fundamental and decisive flaw which has been overlooked by both Hume’s crit -
ics and defenders, probably because they have generally discussed the argument 
only at a very abstract level, without focusing on specific examples. When we do 
focus in this way, I suggest, the flaw is inevitably revealed, and I maintain that this 
very plausibly explains why Hume’s first Enquiry  both omits the argument, and 
explicitly rejects the sort of “antecedent scepticism” that seems to lie behind it. If 
this conjecture is correct, then Hume’s changing attitude towards the argument 
of Treatise  1.4.1 could well have been pivotal in respect of the development of his 
scepticism, giving valuable insight not only into the epistemology of the Treatise , 
but also the contrasting features of his mature epistemology as presented in the 
Enquiry  and later works. Hence my title’s deliberately provocative reference to 
“Hume’s Pivotal Argument.”
1. Introduction
Hume’s argument “Of scepticism with regard to reason” falls into two parts. The 
first part—which I shall call the Uncertainty Argument —starts from the observation 
that we are fallible even in performing simple mathematical calculations; hence 
it is rational to be less than completely certain even in these cases, and accord -
ingly “all knowledge degenerates into probability” (T 1.4.1.1; SBN 180). Whether 
in fact all knowledge would thus degenerate can be disputed, since self-evident 
“intuitive” judgments, for example, are not obviously subject to this problem. But 
for present purposes I shall be accepting Hume’s argument to this point, and in Volume 44, Number 2, 2018169 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
section 2 below give a supportive illustration involving the solution of a quadratic 
equation, a standard part of mathematical education even in Hume’s day,6 which 
will provide a useful focus for subsequent discussion. To highlight assessment of 
the probability of error, I shall suppose that solving the equation in question is 
financially significant, and that purchase of insurance is potentially available, thus 
giving a practical point to that assessment. All this displays Hume’s Uncertainty 
Argument in a favourable light.
The second part of Hume’s argument—the Regress Argument —builds on the first 
by claiming that “we are oblig’d by our reason,” whenever we make any uncertain 
judgment, to make a further judgment assessing the extent of that uncertainty, 
and to take this into account, thus undermining further our confidence in the 
original proposition. But since this further judgment is itself uncertain, a simi -
lar obligation requires us to adjust this by making yet another judgment about 
its own uncertainty, and so on. We are trapped in a regress, which according to 
Hume should eventually leave “nothing of the original probability,” so that “all 
the rules of logic require a continual diminution, and at last a total extinction of 
belief and evidence” (T 1.4.1.6; SBN 182–83). Section 3 below outlines this argu -
ment, applying it briefly to the quadratic equation illustration from section 2, 
and defending Hume against one obvious but superficial objection that can arise 
from misunderstanding his treatment of probability (in which zero represents 
indifference  or lack of belief  rather than certainty of falsehood).
Various other objections have been raised against the Regress Argument (and 
will be mentioned below), but my distinctive focus goes to its very heart, by chal -
lenging the supposed obligation of reason to perform deep iterative reflection: 
there is, I shall claim, no such obligation , and no reasonable basis for it. Section 4 
highlights this supposed obligation, both as briefly expressed by Hume himself, and 
as spelled out more fully by recent sympathetic scholars. Section 5 then rehearses 
a well-known challenge to what Hume takes to be the consequence of follow -
ing through on the obligation, again illustrated by the quadratic example, and 
questioning his assumption that the iterated reflection involved in his regress—if 
accepted as appropriate—must inevitably undermine the original probability. This 
objection, advanced long ago by Thomas Reid and revived by D. G. C. MacNabb, 
reveals Hume’s argument to be seriously incomplete though not yet refuted. In 
section 5 I also identify factors that might have led Hume to take for granted that 
a regress would indeed imply diminution of probability.
My principal objection to the Regress Argument comes in section 6, which 
follows through the quadratic example in a practical situation where again quan -
tification of my degree of assurance is highly pertinent owing to the possibility 
of purchasing insurance against error. This gives good practical reason to move 
beyond first-level reflection (on the mathematical problem itself) to second-level 
reflection (on my probability of mathematical error), but it is much harder to find Hume Studies170 Peter Millican
a situation in which quantitative third-level reflection can plausibly be motivated. 
Such a situation turns out to require that I have new information  at the relevant level 
(for example, performance statistics regarding my previous attempts at second-
level assessment), but even where such information is available, the consequences 
of this third-level reflection seem unlikely to impact more than one level below 
(hence it is unlikely to affect my preferred mathematical solution). It is very hard 
indeed to imagine a realistic scenario in which yet higher-level reflection could be 
well motivated (either epistemologically or practically), and I do not attempt this 
in respect of the quadratic example. But even if such an unusual situation were to 
arise, this discussion suggests that high-level reflection would be unlikely to have 
significant impact on commitments more than one level down (hence it would be 
unlikely to affect either my preferred mathematical solution, or my confidence in 
that solution). The nature of any such impact would also be hard to predict, and 
there is nothing here to support Hume’s presumption that it would undermine 
those commitments.
To sum up so far, Hume’s plausible (and here unchallenged) Uncertainty Ar -
gument apparently seduces him into a tempting generalisation, that “going up a 
level” and taking our reliability into account will always improve our judgments. 
This works well at the first level, at least when have a particular interest in the as -
sessment of our reliability, and when we have some statistics of past performance 
on which to base such an assessment. But generalising from this into the repeated 
iteration of the Regress Argument—supposing that “going up a level” will continue 
to be beneficial even when it loses any contact with either our specific interests 
or further statistical input—is a serious mistake. Hume’s brief and hand-waving 
argument for this generalisation in Treatise  1.4.1.6 (SBN 182) turns out to be unable 
to survive even detailed exposition  involving specific examples, let alone detailed 
analysis.
The Regress Argument is not only faulty in itself, but also implicitly inconsis -
tent with Hume’s own principles, in that it starts off from reflection on our track 
record of success and failure (considering reason as “a kind of cause” in the spirit 
of his “probability of causes”), but then— even if that track record is excellent —ends 
up drawing an extreme sceptical conclusion which is radically at variance with 
that history of success. This might prompt us to wonder how committed Hume 
himself can be to the argument, especially given hints in the Treatise  text that he 
may be presenting it, at least in part, as a reductio  of opposing views. In section 
7, however, I argue that it is not textually defensible to view Hume as here prof -
fering a reductio  of rival views of reason : his words clearly indicate that he himself 
finds the argument rationally  (though not psychologically ) compelling. Far more 
plausible, as urged by Donald Ainslie, is to understand Hume’s strategy as posing a 
reductio  of a then-standard overseer  model of belief  or judgment  (according to which 
our judgment stands over and supervises our other faculties). But as explained in Volume 44, Number 2, 2018171 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
section 8, the coherence of such a strategy crucially depends on Hume’s taking 
the supposed obligation of reason to be genuine . Only if the Regress Argument is 
rationally irrefutable can our inability to accept it provide an empirical objection 
to the overseer model. Thus interpreting the argument as a reductio  in this way 
does not absolve Hume from the accusation of fallacy.
In section 9 I propose an interpretative hypothesis, that Hume himself came 
to realise the inadequacy of the Regress Argument when working towards his Philo -
sophical Essays of 1748 (now known as the first  Enquiry ). This hypothesis builds on 
my earlier philosophical conclusions, that the argument is impossible to spell out 
coherently beyond the first few levels, and that this incoherence becomes evident 
when the attempt is made to apply it to specific examples, an expository device 
which Hume uses frequently in the  Enquiry (though not in the Treatise ). Hence if 
my negative conclusions about the logic of the Regress Argument are correct, and if 
Hume was not merely presenting it as a reductio  of others’ principles, then one can 
reasonably predict  that he would have changed his mind about it in the 1740s—a 
prediction which is, moreover, confirmed by various traces in the concluding 
section of the Enquiry . The significance of this change in his views is explained 
in my final section 10, which highlights the massively destructive role played by 
the Regress Argument in the Conclusion of Treatise  Book 1, and by contrast the 
“mitigated” scepticism advocated at the end of the Enquiry .
2. The Uncertainty Argument
Suppose that I need to solve some familiar type of mathematical equation—maybe 
a quadratic  equation—in a practical situation where the solution really matters: 
if I get it wrong, then I shall lose a significant sum of money, say $1,000. Suppose 
also that someone gives me an opportunity to insure  against such a loss: how much 
should I be prepared to pay for this insurance? The ideal answer will depend on 
the probability that my solution is wrong. And this probability, as Hume points 
out, may itself depend not so much on the reliability of the mathematical proce -
dure that I use to solve the problem, as on my own reliability in carrying out that 
procedure. He goes on to recommend the obvious approach, in accordance with 
his method of “probability of causes” (T 1.3.12), which is to consider how well I 
have performed when attempting such solutions in the past. And note that he 
makes no suggestion here of scepticism about my memory or other records—this 
scepticism is directed towards reason , not memory  or the external world :
In all demonstrative sciences the rules are certain and infallible; but when 
we apply them, our fallible and uncertain faculties are very apt to depart 
from them, and fall into error. We must, therefore, in every reasoning 
form a new judgment, as a check . . . on our first judgment or belief; and Hume Studies172 Peter Millican
must enlarge our view to comprehend a kind of history of all the instances, 
wherein our understanding has deceiv’d us, compar’d with those, wherein 
its testimony was just and true. Our reason must be consider’d as a kind 
of cause, of which truth is the natural effect; but such-a-one as by the 
irruption of other causes, and by the inconstancy of our mental powers, 
may frequently be prevented. By this means all knowledge degenerates 
into probability; and this probability is greater or less, according to our 
experience of the veracity or deceitfulness of our understanding, and . . . 
the simplicity or intricacy of the question. (T 1.4.1.1; SBN 180)
Accordingly, I need to look at my past record of solving quadratic equations: how 
reliable have I actually  been, given the “history of all the instances” that I can 
remember or have recorded? Suppose, for example, that I judge my experienced 
reliability as 95%. In that case, an appropriate price for me to be willing to pay to 
insure against a $1,000 error will be $50.
Hume goes on to claim that this kind of uncertainty will infect even much 
simpler mathematical examples, appealing to considerations (including an appar -
ent Sorites argument at T 1.4.1.3; SBN 181) that are far less straightforward than 
his initial simple point about our fallibility.7 Here significant objections can be 
raised, casting doubt on whether the Uncertainty Argument really implies that 
“all knowledge degenerates into probability” (T 1.4.1.1; SBN 180). For example, it 
might be that I have always  got quadratic equations right, and if so, the case for 
diminution either initially or subsequently is less clear, since arguably a Humean 
“proof” could resist probabilistic erosion.8 Or there might be instances of “knowl -
edge” that are based on immediate intuition  rather than calculation, and hence 
would not be subject to the same possibility of error.9 But for present purposes, 
these objections can be put to one side, and we can focus on the quadratic example 
sketched above, in which I am well aware of my own past fallibility.
3. The Regress Argument
Let us accordingly assume that Hume’s Uncertainty Argument has adjusted my 
confidence concerning the $1,000 quadratic equation to 95%, based on my 
remembered past experience. That seems reasonable enough, and I might well 
consider $50 an appropriate price to pay if insurance is available against getting 
it wrong. But this is only the first step in Hume’s destructively sceptical argument, 
and I have yet to face his vicious regress, which he apparently sees as applying to 
any probable judgment whatever:10
Having thus found in every probability, beside the original uncertainty 
inherent in the subject, a new uncertainty deriv’d from the weakness of Volume 44, Number 2, 2018173 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
that faculty, which judges, and having adjusted these two together, we 
are oblig’d by our reason to add a new doubt deriv’d from the possibility 
of error in the estimation we make of the truth and fidelity of our facul -
ties. This is a doubt, . . . of which, if we wou’d closely pursue our reason, 
we cannot avoid giving a decision. But this decision, tho’ it shou’d be 
favourable to our preceeding judgment, being founded only on prob -
ability, must weaken still further our first evidence, and must itself be 
weaken’d by a fourth doubt of the same kind, and so on in infinitum ; till 
at last there remain nothing of the original probability, however great we 
may suppose it to have been, and however small the diminution by every 
new uncertainty. No finite object can subsist under a decrease repeated in 
infinitum ; and . . . must in this manner be reduc’d to nothing. . . . [O]ur first 
belief . . . must infallibly perish by passing thro’ so many new examina -
tions, of which each diminishes somewhat of its force and vigour. When 
I reflect on the natural fallibility of my judgment, I have less confidence 
in my opinions, than when I only consider the objects concerning which 
I reason; and when I proceed still farther, to turn the scrutiny against 
every successive estimation I make of my faculties, all the rules of logic 
require a continual diminution, and at last a total extinction of belief and 
evidence. (T 1.4.1.6; SBN 182–83)
So after I have made my first-level judgment about the quadratic equation itself (for 
example, that its only positive solution is x=16), and then the second-level judg -
ment that I am 95% reliable in solving quadratic equations, I should supposedly 
make a third-level reflective judgment to take into account “a new doubt deriv’d 
from the possibility of error in the estimation we make of the truth and fidelity 
of our faculties.” In other words, I should factor in my reliability (or otherwise) in 
making second-level judgments about the reliability of my competence in solv -
ing such problems as quadratic equations. And after having done that, I should 
make a fourth-level judgment to factor in my reliability (or otherwise) in making 
such third-level judgments, and so on ad infinitum . Each of these additional fac -
tors, Hume thinks, will involve some diminution of the overall probability that I 
should assign to my first-level judgment about the quadratic equation itself, thus 
progressively resulting—if my judgments are faithful to “the rules of logic”—in 
“a total extinction of belief and evidence.”11
We shall shortly consider whether indeed “we are oblig’d by our reason” to 
enter Hume’s sceptical regress. But before proceeding, it is worth noting that he 
sees the outcome of this regress as being “total extinction of belief,” so when he 
talks of the “original probability” being “reduc’d to nothing,” charity requires that 
we should interpret all this as taking place on a scale that treats 0 as indifference . 
Such a scale is unconventional by modern standards, since we are used to treating Hume Studies174 Peter Millican
0.5 as indifference, and 0 as certainty of falsehood. But the Humean alternative 
is perfectly coherent, as can be seen if we imagine the conventional scale—with 
1 held fast as representing certainty—being “stretched” linearly downwards so 
that certainty of falsehood moves down from 0 to -1, while indifference (which is 
halfway between the two extremes) correspondingly moves down from 0.5 to 0. 
This interpretation of Humean probabilities is moreover strongly supported by 
two consistent features of his more mathematical discussions of the topic. First, 
in a number of places (for instance, T 1.3.12.19, 2.3.1.12; EHU 10.4; SBN 138, 403, 
1 1 1), he treats the force of probabilistic evidence as being measured by the differ -
ence  between the number of positive “experiments” and the number of negative 
“experiments,” so that an exact balance of evidence either way, corresponding to 
complete indifference, would give a value of 0 (rather than the conventional 0.5). 
Second, he often talks of probabilities as being proportional  to the overall number 
of instances (for instance, T 1.3.12.10–1 1, 15–18, 22; 1.3.13.20; EHU 6.2–4, 10.3–6; 
SBN 134, 136–37, 139–40, 154, 56–58, 1 10–12), suggesting that the balance of “ex -
periments” should be normalised  so that uniform positive evidence gives a value 
of 1. These two features are combined in the Treatise ’s most sustained discussion of 
probabilistic evidence, at T 1.3.1 1.9–13 (SBN 127–30), which accordingly seems to 
imply a theory in which the f orce of evidence  constituted by p positive and n negative 
instances—let us call this a Humean credibility —should be calculated arithmetically 
as (p–n)/(p+n).12 Where all instances are positive, this gives a result of 1, while if all 
are negative, the result is -1.13 Though this theory is indeed coherent, however, it 
has the serious drawback of complicating the mathematics of standard operations 
(such as conjunction of independent events, or disjunction of mutually exclusive 
events). This, in turn, potentially has implications for Hume’s Regress Argument—
for example, by obscuring the conditions under which an iterated conjunction’s 
probability will tend towards 0—which would need to be addressed by any defence 
of his position. But for present purposes we can leave such complications aside.
4. The Supposed Obligation of Reason
Recall how Hume, having reduced “knowledge” to “probability” through his 
Uncertainty Argument, proceeds to introduce his ultimately all-encompassing 
destructive regress:
Having thus found in every probability, beside the original uncertainty 
inherent in the subject, a new uncertainty deriv’d from the weakness of 
that faculty, which judges, and having adjusted these two together, we 
are oblig’d by our reason  to add a new doubt deriv’d from the possibility of 
error in the estimation we make of the truth and fidelity of our faculties. 
(T 1.4.1.6, emphasis added; SBN 182)Volume 44, Number 2, 2018175 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
Thus reason supposedly obliges  us to take into account “the possibility of error in 
the estimation we make of the truth and fidelity of our faculties,” and this appar -
ently involves a judgment of probability that we have erred in our estimation. 
Clearly such error is entirely possible—even likely—and accordingly defenders of 
Hume’s argument have typically taken the obligation to be a clear requirement of 
epistemic responsibility. The underlying motivation here seems to be something 
like the principle of total evidence , that in Keynes’s words, “in reckoning a probability 
we must take into account all the information which we have.”14 If, therefore, we 
have information about our own fallibility, that too must be put into the reckon -
ing when making an overall judgment to which that fallibility might be relevant. 
Ted Morris expresses this line of thought well:
Hume clearly thinks that, as rationally reflective epistemic agents, we 
are obliged to . . . critically assess the quality of our judgments of prob -
ability. . . . But if this is correct, why should reflective evaluation of our 
abilities stop there? Isn’t it merely arbitrary to claim that we should assess 
our judgments of probability, and to say that it is unnecessary to assess 
our ability to make assessments of this kind? . . . To stop at the first stage 
of assessment is sheer dogmatism, an unwarranted departure from the 
spirit of rationally reflective epistemic agency, unless some argument can 
be given to show that assessments at that stage  are somehow infallible. 
(Morris, “Hume’s Scepticism” , 47–48)
So having estimated that we are, say, 95% likely to have solved the quadratic 
equation correctly (a second-level  judgment), we need to go on to make a further 
assessment (now third-level ) about the accuracy of that estimate.15 But clearly this 
further assessment will itself be fallible, and so the same argument can be used for 
going yet further. We have already seen Hume’s own presentation of this point (at 
the beginning of section 3 above), and again Morris expresses it clearly:
If we apply these considerations to the judgment we make at the second 
stage of assessment, we should also assess that  judgment as an assess -
ment of probability. This sets up a vicious infinite regress of assessments 
of assessments. We have no justification for stopping the procedure at 
any particular stage. . . . If we are reasonable, then, we are committed 
to assessing every assessment of probability we make in the light of our 
realization that we are highly fallible assessors. . . . Given the way Hume 
presents his argument, there is no non-arbitrary end to the stages of iter -
ated assessment I’m obliged as a rationally reflective epistemic agent to 
go through. My assessment should never conclude. I must always keep 
reassessing, and presumably should withhold judgment until the testing Hume Studies176 Peter Millican
procedure ends. But here it never does. I’m never warranted in believing, 
so I never believe. Meanwhile, my confidence level decreases with each 
further assessment. (Morris, “Hume’s Scepticism,” 48–51)
Morris thus argues that a “reflective epistemic agent” is rationally obliged to enter 
Hume’s regress. Henry Allison, likewise, sees this as obligatory for a “maximally 
responsible but fallible reasoner” ( Custom and Reason , 223), because “according 
to ‘the rules of logic’ to which this reasoner is committed, there is no principled  
point at which she could stop the process of reflective assessment and confidently 
retain her belief” (224). Other scholars also agree,16 but in section 6 below I shall 
be challenging this.
5. Challenging the Iterative Reduction
First, however, let us clarify how Hume’s argument is supposed to apply to our 
example, and at the same time, briefly address the principal objection that has 
hitherto dominated most discussion of the argument. In the case we have been 
considering: (a) I have just attempted to solve a quadratic equation (for example, 
using the standard formula); and (b) my remembered and recorded past experi -
ence suggests that I get such things right 95% of the time. Also, as a matter of 
pragmatic—rather than epistemological—significance, (c) an incorrect solution 
will cost me $1,000; and (d) I have an opportunity to insure against making a 
mistake, thus giving a practical purpose to my estimate of this probability.17 If my 
estimated 5% probability of error is correct, then the price that I should be prepared 
to pay for insuring against a $1,000 loss is $50. If my estimate is incorrect, then 
the appropriate price might be very different, and we can assume that it is in my 
interest to get the price right.
So to continue this story, the worry has now been raised that perhaps my esti -
mate of 95% reliability is wrong: but what follows? In the practical case that we are 
considering, it would be natural to check over my memory and records of solving 
quadratic equations,18 to ensure that my estimate of 95% reliability is broadly cor -
rect. Hume’s argument has not mentioned any sceptical worries about memory or 
written records, and indeed, he earlier enjoined us to consider the “history of all 
the instances” in which we have made previous judgments, so apparently he sees 
no problem in principle here. Moreover, he recognises that my verdict after this 
checking might be “favourable to [my] preceeding judgment”—perhaps it turns 
out that I have indeed been 95% reliable, or perhaps even better, say 97% reliable. 
Yet according to Hume, “this decision . . . being founded only on probability, must 
weaken still further our first evidence” (T 1.4.1.6; SBN 182). But in the situation 
we are discussing, such a claim seems very dubious (and at least requires some 
defence): it may indeed be true that the confirming assessment is “founded only Volume 44, Number 2, 2018177 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
on probability,” but in so far as it has any force, this tends to increase  rather than 
reduce  my confidence of having solved the quadratic equation correctly. This simple 
point, commonly considered to be the chief objection to Hume’s argument, goes 
all the way back to Reid: “My decision upon this second point is favourable to 
my first judgment, and therefore, as I apprehend, must strengthen it. To say, that 
this decision, because it is only probable, must weaken the first evidence, seems 
to me contrary to all rules of logic, and to common sense” ( Essays , VII.iv, 568). 
In recent years this objection has been associated with MacNabb, who puts it in 
somewhat similar language: “it seems evident to commonsense that the second-
order judgement that I am very likely, though not certain, to be correct in some 
first-order judgement increases rather than diminishes the authority of that first-
order judgement” ( David Hume , 101).19
Given that this objection is indeed fairly “evident to commonsense,” it is 
striking that Hume’s text offers no argument for his apparent assumption that any 
higher-order judgment, simply in virtue of “being founded only on probability, 
must weaken” the lower-order evidence to which it is applied. This suggests that 
he might simply have taken for granted the most familiar pattern of iterated prob -
abilities, which applies when we are faced with a sequence of outcomes, each of 
which is a necessary condition  for the next stage.20 One clear example of this would 
be an “accumulator bet,” where I gamble on the sequence of events A, B, C,  and D 
(for example, results of football matches, or horses winning races), and I win only if 
all four  component predictions are fulfilled. Another example would be the passing 
of a message down a line of testimony from P to Q to R to S to T, where the message 
gets passed faithfully only if all four transfers succeed. In such cases, adding an 
additional uncertain  event to the sequence can only reduce  the overall probability 
of success, and if the sequence is potentially infinite, then this overall probability 
will almost inevitably tend to zero on the conventional scale of probabilities.21 
But note that the epistemic consequences in terms of rational belief  will differ radi -
cally between these two examples: whereas a massively iterated accumulator bet 
becomes vanishingly unlikely to win , a massively iterated line of testimony becomes 
vanishingly unlikely to deliver a trustworthy report . Hence, I should tend towards 
disbelief  that the accumulator will win, but indifference  as regards the content of the 
report (unless, of course, I have some other source of information available). The 
latter—but not the former—would fit with the total loss of belief that Hume sees 
as the upshot of his argument.22 It is therefore interesting to note that earlier in 
the Treatise , at T 1.3.13.5 (SBN 145–46), he discusses chains of historical testimony 
as potentially giving rise to “reiterated diminutions” of “force and evidence,” and 
there refers forward to Treatise  1.4.1 as providing “one very memorable exception” 
to the general impossibility of “conviction . . . subsist[ing] under such reiterated 
diminutions.” Perhaps, then, he viewed repeated checking as relevantly similar to Hume Studies178 Peter Millican
a chain of testimony, but in neither place does he provide any explicit argument 
for such a parallel.23
Moreover, this sort of progressive diminution is not always the right way to 
treat iterated probabilities, particularly when dealing with a sequence of distinct 
items of evidence bearing on a single claim . Here, adding new positive evidence (for 
example, testimony of further witnesses in favour of a reported event) will usually 
increase  the overall probability rather than reducing it, even if that new evidence 
by itself would have minimal force (for example, where the further witnesses are 
only 51% likely to tell the truth on any particular occasion).24 So a crucial question 
for Hume’s Regress Argument is whether the main case that we have been discuss -
ing—of the quadratic equation whose solution is being iteratively checked—is 
closer in spirit to the case just mentioned—of a sequence of distinct items of 
evidence bearing on a single claim—than it is to a chain of testimony (or, indeed, 
an accumulator bet). Hume himself does not address this question, apparently 
taking for granted that “many new examinations” will automatically generate a 
decrease in probability. But the fact that iterated probabilities can behave quite 
differently in different cases makes it incumbent on defenders of his argument to 
justify  treating them as he does, especially given the counterintuitive outcome to 
which this leads.25
6. Challenging the Supposed Obligation
To explore whether any such justification might be available, let us try iterating 
our concerns about the quadratic case in the sort of way that Hume recommends. 
Suppose, then, that my first estimate of my reliability at solving these equations 
was 95%, but now, on checking, I get 97% instead. This would appear to give some 
substance to Hume’s point that my estimating abilities are unreliable, and hence 
that I should attempt to measure my unreliability and factor it into the overall 
assessment. If I accept this obligation, then such measurement will presumably 
involve me in trying to recall the past cases in which I have carried out this sort of 
checking of previous estimates (pondering a “history of all the instances”), with a 
view to confirming that they have all indicated a reasonable level of accuracy (say, 
within 5% either way). At this point I am unlikely to have many past cases to go 
on, since such higher-level checking is something I rarely do. And if I then go up 
another level, to consider my track record in cases where I have tried to assess such 
higher-level checkings, I will almost certainly draw a statistical blank. Continuing 
further again—into yet higher-level checkings that become harder and harder to 
understand, let alone carry out—seems pointless and even absurd, yet according 
to Hume the regress has barely started, since “we are oblig’d by our reason” to 
continue it to infinity! Something seems to have gone seriously wrong here.Volume 44, Number 2, 2018179 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
To analyse the situation more systematically, let us wind back to the begin -
ning and ask what all this was supposed to achieve. I started out wanting to know 
the solution to a quadratic equation, and calculated a credible answer. At that 
stage, I had no particular interest in the general accuracy of my quadratic-solving 
ability, though I was of course taking this somewhat for granted in setting out to 
solve the equation myself (rather than, say, paying someone else to solve it for 
me). The fact that $1,000 depended on my getting it right might well have given 
me some concern about the correctness of my answer, but the natural response to 
such concern—unless outside help was available—would have been for me to do 
repeated mathematical checking, ideally using a variety of techniques.26 Left to 
myself in this situation, it is hard to see any obvious motivation for going to any 
higher level of reflection about my abilities, since doing so is not going to help 
me to get the right answer.27
Such motivation can arise, however, if I am given the opportunity to insure  
against error. This gives me a clear interest in discovering my general level of accu -
racy, not for its own sake, nor because it helps me to solve the equation, nor because 
it will impact on my solution, but simply in order to work out the appropriate 
odds for prudent insurance. So now I have a good practical reason for moving up 
to the second level, to assess my own abilities. The obvious way of undertaking 
this assessment is to follow Hume’s advice and check out my past statistics, by 
considering the “history of all the instances, wherein [my] understanding has 
deceiv’d [me], compar’d with those, wherein its testimony was just and true.” Thus 
I need to go back to my memory and records, on which—as emphasised earlier—
Hume’s argument has cast no doubt. There is, however, a complication here: these 
records might help me to identify my past solutions  of quadratic equations, but 
how can I know whether or not these solutions were correct ? Unless I have outside 
feedback—from a teacher, perhaps, or a computer, or from some kind of practical 
outcome that hinges on my getting things right—it seems that even in assessing 
my past record, I am thrown back on the need to do more mathematical  (rather 
than higher level) checking.
But let us put this complication to one side, and assume that my past level of 
performance can be readily discovered, perhaps because my solutions were formally 
(and reliably) graded in some educational context. So now I can count through 
and check the percentage of equations that I have solved correctly. And again, if 
my past history of solving quadratic equations— while making all the checks that I 
can carry out myself at the mathematical level —reveals 95% reliability; and if getting 
it right is worth $1,000 to me in this case; then it makes sense— even after such care -
ful personal checking —to pay $50 to insure against failure. But now Hume’s third 
level of reflection is supposed to come into play: how can I be sure that the figure 
of 95% is correct? Given my acknowledged interest in discovering my past level of 
accuracy, this question might indeed concern me. But if it does, the obvious and Hume Studies180 Peter Millican
appropriate thing for me to do is to recheck my statistics—to go back again over 
those educational records—and carefully recalculate the relevant percentage. If I 
then get the same answer, I am reassured that I had it right before. If I get a different 
answer, I will do yet more checks. And if checking again and again just brings me 
a random sequence of very different answers, I will conclude that I am hopeless 
at this sort of exercise. But in none of these cases is there any obvious benefit in 
moving up to a higher level of systematic reflection about my abilities in making 
such statistical assessments, since doing so is very unlikely to help me make better 
judgments at the levels that concern me.28
I say “very unlikely,” because it is not entirely impossible  that such higher-
level reflection could help here, though the kind of scenario involved would be 
extremely unusual. Suppose, then, that I have been in this sort of situation many 
times before, assessing my reliability on a variety of mathematical problems 
(with a view to purchasing insurance or whatever), and in these situations I have 
repeatedly assessed my past statistics in an apparently consistent manner, but 
have then repeatedly discovered after the event—presumably through some in -
dependent feedback—that my estimates were uniformly wrong (for example, 3% 
too high). In that case, I could indeed improve my second-level assessment of my 
reliability in solving quadratic equations (for example, by adjusting it down from 
95% to 92%), but only because I have a genuine track record of such assessments 
to consult, which is itself informed by some reliable independent feedback. But 
this possibility gives no help to Hume’s argument, which takes the obligation of 
reason to move to higher levels as applying quite independently of such concrete 
information (which is why it can continue to infinity). I am supposed somehow 
to be obliged to reflect on my ability to make high-level statistical assessments, 
even if I have no track record of having performed such assessments, and no other source 
of information to inform those reflections .
Even in the unusual scenario just described, in which I do have some incentive 
for third-level reflection in order to correct my second-level statistical assessment 
of my first-level reliability, there is no reason to expect that this will change my 
first-level solution to the quadratic equation itself. It might slightly diminish my 
confidence  in that solution (say, from 95% down to 92%), but this gives me no 
reason for abandoning it: indeed it could well give me a more solid basis for stick -
ing to that solution in preference to any other, by providing long-term statistical 
evidence, with reliable independent feedback, that my reliability is over 91% 
(which in turn suggests that my actual answer is over 10 times more likely than 
any alternative).29 Thus even where level-3 reflection diminishes my confidence 
at level-2, it will not thereby change my decision at level-1. This casts doubt on 
Hume’s unargued assumption at T 1.4.1.6 (SBN 182) that higher-level doubts must 
inevitably iterate down to “weaken . . . our first evidence”: indeed, the example we 
have just examined suggests that higher-level reflection is unlikely to impact on Volume 44, Number 2, 2018181 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
the specific judgment made just two levels below, let alone further. Hence level-4 
reflection, even if we could make sense of it in some probably far-fetched and 
artificial scenario (which I shall not attempt to imagine here), looks unlikely to 
impact on the level-2 assessment that informs my purchase of insurance, let alone 
on the quadratic solution itself. Moving up Hume’s regress has by now become 
both barely intelligible and utterly pointless.
But further, even if such increasingly high-level reflection could in principle 
impact on our arithmetical conclusions or our confidence in them, it would not 
follow that it was rationally well motivated. There should be no automatic as -
sumption that reflection becomes more authoritative at higher levels, since on 
the contrary, it is likely to become less, rather than more, reliable (and not only 
because we quickly run out of experiential data). Humans are characteristically 
far better at concrete than abstract thinking, and far more likely to be reliable 
when pondering specific problems of a kind that they have trained to solve than 
when engaging in highly abstract reflection. We are also often bad at assessing 
our own competence, with some people too confident, and others too diffident. 
Those schooled in solving equations, with frequent feedback from a teacher, will 
be vastly more aware of their competence in that specific skill than in their high-
level reflection. Moreover we are easily distracted and confused when faced with 
multiple problems and complex information, so the idea that we have a rational 
duty—when trying to solve an equation—to divert our focus from that mathemati -
cal problem into highly abstract levels of reflection about our own competence 
is clearly ludicrous on any practical level. Relatedly, worrying about our abilities 
can tend to undermine those very abilities. For example, a chess player who feels 
unconfident about his endgame technique, and finds himself reflecting anxiously 
on past failures, is typically less likely to succeed in a real-time contest than one who 
is able to focus wholeheartedly on the problem at hand (though the reverse can 
apply when plenty of time is available, as in correspondence chess, where careful 
analysis of past errors, and how to avoid them, can indeed be genuinely help -
ful). The key point, however, is that all these are empirical matters: however they 
might turn out, it is not an a priori truth that higher-level reflection is epistemologically 
beneficial. Hence it cannot be an priori truth that such reflection is a rational obligation .
Here the defender of Hume might be tempted to protest that the point just 
emphasised, so far from being an objection  to him, is entirely in line with his own 
principles. For Hume does not generally treat obligations as being a priori, either in 
the case of morality (for example, T 3.1.1.4–6, 17–25; 3.2.5.4–6; 3.2.6.6; SBN 456–57, 
463–68, 517–19, 528–29) or in the current case of reasoning according to the “prob -
ability of causes” (T 1.3.12). This is true enough, but then the criticism becomes 
that in the argument of Treatise  1.4.1, Hume fails to be consistent with his own 
principles when he insists that infinitely iterated doubts are an obligation of reason, 
despite there being no apparent empirical  basis for any such obligation. Indeed, it Hume Studies182 Peter Millican
is hard to see how he could even suppose there to be any plausible empirical case 
for a method of proceeding which he himself considers psychologically unfeasible  
beyond the initial stages (T 1.4.1.7, 10; SBN 183, 185), is ultimately impossible  even 
in principle (as requiring infinite iteration), and which—were it possible—would 
be self-defeating  (as leading to total loss of belief). Accordingly, his argument for the 
supposed obligation of reason briefly outlined in T 1.4.1.6 (SBN 182)—like those 
of Morris and Allison also quoted in section 4 above—has a strongly aprioristic 
flavour, failing even to consider the empirical question of how far iterated reflection 
is actually  beneficial in practice. But this empirical question ought to be crucial 
to any proper application of the method that Hume advocates, treating reason 
“as a kind of cause” and statistically assessing its empirical track record  in delivering 
truth, with an awareness that the probability of error may vary in different cases 
“according to the simplicity or intricacy of the question” (T 1.4.1.1; SBN 180).30 If 
we pursue this method rigorously, in the spirit of Hume’s “rules by which to judge 
of causes and effects” (T 1.3.15, cf. T 1.3.13.1 1; SBN 149), then we should apply the 
same kind of probabilistic thinking to the outcome of specific reasoning methods. 
Thus the very principles from which Hume’s argument begins require us to assess 
such methods on the basis of their past track record , as emphasised in my previous 
paragraph. But again, if we assess the method of extreme iterated doubt in this 
way, it is immediately revealed to be hopeless, generating confusion and tending 
to undermine our judgments, even in cases where sticking to first-level induction 
could have brought us a success rate of over 90%! So Hume’s insistence in Treatise  
1.4.1 that rationality would require “total extinction of belief”—by uncritically 
adhering to the method of extreme iterated doubt even as it becomes manifestly 
out of line with the statistical track record from which the entire assessment is 
supposed to begin—is showing too little  reflective consistency with the inductive 
principles from which he starts, rather than too much .31
These points are cumulatively devastating, but not particularly difficult to see 
once we attempt to apply the iterative doubt of Treatise  1.4.1 to a specific example 
(such as our quadratic equation). And if Hume had made the same attempt, rather 
than discussing the method so summarily and at such a high level of abstraction, 
it is hard to believe that he would have remained persuaded that it was rationally 
defensible, let alone rationally obligatory. His Regress Argument starts reasonably 
enough, from the observation that any “probable” judgment we make will carry 
a risk of error, and the consequent recommendation that we should moderate 
our confidence in any first-level judgment by taking into account our actual track 
record of relevant successes and failures. But this does not plausibly commit us to 
a policy of performing iterated assessments at ever higher levels, and doing so  even 
when we lack any empirical data to base them on . Such a progression conflicts, indeed, 
with Hume’s own fundamental principles of epistemological empiricism, since it 
puts epistemological weight on iterative assessments which (beyond the first few Volume 44, Number 2, 2018183 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
levels) lack any empirical foundation or inductive track record. And it also loses 
any plausible support from the widely accepted principle of total evidence , because 
without any inductive track record to base them on, fifth-level speculations (say) 
about my accuracy in making fourth-level assessments remain just that—specula -
tions—and cannot provide evidence  worthy of the name, even if my fourth-level 
accuracy were in fact relevant to the first-level issue that concerns me. But further, as 
we have seen, it is not at all clear that my fourth-level accuracy actually has any such 
relevance, still less that a negative verdict at that level should impact negatively on 
my confidence in my first-level judgment. To the contrary, we observe in practice 
that we get less reliable as we try to reflect abstractly on our higher-level abilities 
(losing focus, as we do so, on our first-level subject-matter). Having made that ob -
servation, the very same principle  that motivates Hume’s argument—namely, that 
we should take into account any method’s empirical track record when evaluating 
its results—tells against  raising our reflection to any further levels. Repeatedly iter -
ated reflection turns out to be not only practically unfeasible and psychologically 
difficult, but also epistemologically counterproductive, as Hume himself would 
surely have recognised if he had worked it through with any practical example.
To sum up, then: First, Hume has offered no reason whatever—beyond a 
handwaving “and so on” (T 1.4.1.6; SBN 182)—to justify his claim that repeated 
iterative reflection is rationally obligatory. Second, such iteration seems unnatu -
ral and implausible, and is contrary to any established philosophical practice, so 
there is a clear onus on Hume to justify his claim. Third, we have seen a sequence 
of strong considerations that collectively make a compelling case against such 
iteration, both rationally and pragmatically. Fourth, this case appeals to the very 
principles of probable reasoning from which the sceptical argument appears to 
start. Hence, we can very safely conclude: Hume’s statement at T 1.4.1.6 that “we 
are oblig’d by our reason” to engage in extreme iterative doubt is both incorrect, and also 
runs contrary to his own more general principles .
7. Does Hume Himself Accept the Obligation of Reason?
These apparent tensions in Hume’s position might, however, be mitigated if his 
Regress Argument was intended as a reductio  of previous philosophers’ views—re -
ducing them either to absurdity or to manifest empirical falsehood—by taking the 
troublesome obligation of reason to be their commitment rather than his own. 
And his text does indeed rather suggest this, in two ways. First, he acknowledges 
that he himself cannot “sincerely assent” to the argument and relinquish all his 
beliefs, because they are subject to nature’s “absolute and uncontroulable neces -
sity” (T 1.4.1.7; SBN 183). Then he appears to describe the argument not as his own 
invention, but as borrowed from “those sceptics, who hold that all is uncertain, Hume Studies184 Peter Millican
and that our judgment is not in any thing possest of any measures of truth and 
falshood”:
My intention then in displaying so carefully the arguments of that fantas -
tic sect, is only to make the reader sensible of the truth of my hypothesis, 
that all our reasonings concerning causes and effects are deriv’d from nothing 
but custom; and that belief is more properly an act of the sensitive, than of the 
cogitative part of our natures . (T 1.4.1.8; SBN 183)
Emphasising this passage, Annette Baier situates Hume’s argument within a broader 
narrative of the Treatise  as a “progress of sentiments” in which the scope of “reason” 
is progressively widened to become sensitive and ultimately social, rather than 
purely intellectual: “Hume claims explicitly that [ Treatise  1.4.1] is directed at reason 
as ratiocination or cogitation . . . displaying . . . the arguments of the ‘fantastic 
sect’ of sceptics who try to destroy ratiocination with their ratiocination” (Baier, 
Progress of Sentiments , 61). She elsewhere describes the target of Hume’s reductio  
strategy as “rationalism” (87), “rationalist or intellectualist reason” and “calcula -
tive (non-causal) reasoning” (96). The common factor here seems to be not so 
much a particular philosophical view, or a particular rationalist philosopher, as a 
broad contrast with Hume’s own “sensitive” picture of causal inference. Likewise 
Morris—whose account of the supposed obligation of reason we saw in section 4 
above—interprets Hume’s Regress Argument as a reductio , starting from the false 
ideal of “rationally reflective epistemic agency” and proving its absurdity: “Hume is 
saying that . . . if we were reflective rational epistemic agents, then not only would 
we know nothing, we would be unable to form any beliefs at all! ” (Morris, “Hume’s 
Scepticism” , 56).32
Although this sort of interpretation has obvious attractions, not least that it 
potentially absolves Hume from the fallacies implicit in the Regress Argument, it 
seems to me both historically and textually implausible. First, it is far from clear 
that any previous philosophers would actually have been committed to the novel 
and radically sceptical argument that Hume would thus be foisting on them. 
Even if they agreed with its reasonable initial moves, namely the Uncertainty 
Argument and the introduction of second-level reflection, he could not expect 
that this would force them into his vicious regress, unless he himself took this to be 
a genuine rational requirement . Further, as we have already seen, he apparently sees 
the argument’s logic as starting from his own  method of “probability of causes,” 
rather than from any rival “rationalist” position, and the argument’s faults, as 
uncovered in §5 and §6 above, are sufficiently general that, once they have been 
recognised, the argument simply ceases to pose a coherent reductio  of any plausible 
ideal of reasoning, whether “intellectualist,” “calculative,” “rationally reflective,” 
or whatever. So if the argument is indeed supposed to be a reductio  of some previous Volume 44, Number 2, 2018185 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
view of reason, it is hard to identify which target Hume might have in mind. Both 
Baier and Morris gesture towards Descartes, whose “method of doubt” does indeed 
recommend fundamental questioning of our faculties with the sort of insistent 
rigour that Hume’s argument displays.33 But the recursive probabilistic  doubts of 
Hume’s argument seem very un-Cartesian, because the method of doubt explicitly 
rejects anything short of certainty , and Descartes accordingly shows little interest 
in probability.34 Even if Descartes had such an interest, moreover, there is nothing 
in his texts to suggest that he would be committed to accepting the dubious steps 
that we have identified in the Regress Argument. That argument’s main problem, 
to be clear, is not that it is obsessively concerned with rationally reflective doubt 
(of which Descartes might well approve); rather, it is that the argument’s way of 
applying that doubt is fundamentally irrational . For as we saw in sections 5 and 6 
above, Hume is simply mistaken in supposing that thoroughgoing rational reflec -
tion would have the consequences that he alleges. So from a logical point of view, 
the Regress Argument cannot in fact  provide a cogent reductio  of Descartes’s view 
of reason (nor, I suspect, that of any other prominent pre-Humean philosopher). 
And from an interpretative point of view, if Hume mistakenly thought that the 
Regress Argument did provide a cogent reductio , then apparently this could only 
be because he himself failed to see the argument’s faults, in which case the reductio  
interpretation loses most of its point.
Quite apart from the difficulty of identifying some prior view of reason that 
provides a plausible target for a would-be reductio , Hume’s text gives the clear 
impression that he himself indeed views the problematic obligation of reason as 
entirely genuine, and accordingly accepts the Regress Argument as a cogent chal -
lenge. Passages confirming this—either explicitly or implicitly—occur repeatedly 
both in Treatise  1.4.1 and in two subsequent sections of Book 1 part 4 (emphasis 
added in all cases):35
we are oblig’d by our reason  to add a new doubt . . . of which . . . we cannot 
avoid giving a decision. . . . When I . . . turn the scrutiny against every 
successive estimation I make of my faculties, all the rules of logic require 
a continual diminution, and at last a total extinction of belief and evidence . 
(T 1.4.1.6; SBN 182–83)
I have here prov’d, . . . I say, I have prov’d , that these same principles, . . . 
must, by continually diminishing the original evidence, at last reduce it to 
nothing, and utterly subvert all belief and opinion. . . . But as experience 
will sufficiently convince any one, who thinks it worth while to try, that 
tho’ he can find no error in the foregoing arguments , yet he still continues to 
believe. (T 1.4.1.8; SBN 183–84)Hume Studies186 Peter Millican
But here, perhaps, it may be demanded, how it happens, even upon my 
hypothesis , that these arguments above-explain’d produce not a total 
suspense of judgment, and after what manner the mind ever retains a 
degree of assurance in any subject? (T 1.4.1.9; SBN 184)
This sceptical doubt, both with respect to reason and the senses, is a 
malady, which can never be radically cur’d. . . . ’Tis impossible upon any 
system to defend  either our understanding  or senses; and we but expose them 
farther when we endeavour to justify them in that manner. . . . Careless -
ness and in-attention alone can afford us any remedy . (T 1.4.2.57; SBN 218)
I have already shewn, that the understanding, when it acts alone, and according 
to its most general principles, entirely subverts itself, and leaves not the lowest 
degree of evidence in any proposition, either in philosophy or common life.  We 
save ourselves from this total scepticism only by means of that . . . seem -
ingly trivial property of the fancy, by which we enter with difficulty into 
remote views of things, . . . [If we accept refin’d reasoning], we subvert 
entirely the human understanding. (T 1.4.7.7; SBN 267–68)
At T 1.4.1.6 (SBN 182–83), after asserting the supposed obligation of reason, Hume 
implies that it is required by “all the rules of logic.” At T 1.4.1.8 (SBN 183–84), he 
indicates that no error can be found in the Regress Argument. At T 1.4.1.9–10 (SBN 
184–85), he recognises a challenge to explain on his own principles  why we do not 
totally suspend belief in response to the argument, and his answer is not that the 
argument is in any way faulty, nor that it is merely a reductio  of other philosophers’ 
principles, but rather, that we psychologically lose focus after the first couple of 
stages. In the last paragraph of T 1.4.2 (SBN 218), having finished his companion 
discussion of “scepticism with regard to the senses,” Hume refers back to T 1.4.1 as 
having shown that human reason is indefensible, and repeats that only “careless -
ness and in-attention” enable us to avoid scepticism. Finally, in the concluding 
section of Book 1, he again repeats both of these messages, shortly before going 
on to draw from them “a very dangerous dilemma” (T 1.4.7.6, SBN 267) which is 
crucial to the entire discussion of that section (and which we shall consider briefly 
in section 10 below). Here the epistemic annihilation threatened by “scepticism 
with regard to reason” seems to be posed as a serious problem  for Hume himself , 
and one that bothers him greatly.36 In short, every one of the texts quoted above 
indicates that Hume considers the Regress Argument to be entirely successful in 
rational terms, and there is no text in the Treatise  that even suggests the reverse, 
with the single exception of the passage at T 1.4.1.8 (SBN 183) which gives a hint 
that the argument is not his own.Volume 44, Number 2, 2018187 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
8. A Reductio  of Rival Theories of Belief?
What, then, are we to make of that passage from T 1.4.1.8, briefly quoted at the 
beginning of the previous section, which seemed to suggest that Hume intends 
his argument as a reductio ? Such an interpretation is indeed plausible, but if we 
read further within the same paragraph, we find clear evidence that Hume’s likely 
target here is not so much a rival theory of reasoning , as a rival theory of belief :
If belief . . . were a simple act of the thought, without any peculiar manner 
of conception, or the addition of a force and vivacity, it must infallibly 
destroy itself, and in every case terminate in a total suspense of judgment. 
But as experience will sufficiently convince any one . . . , that tho’ he can 
find no error in the foregoing arguments, yet he still continues to believe, 
and think, and reason as usual, he may safely conclude, that his reasoning 
and belief is some sensation or peculiar manner of conception, which ’tis 
impossible for mere ideas and reflections to destroy. (T 1.4.1.8; SBN 184)
As we shall see, however, an interpretation in terms of this sort of reductio  fails to 
defend Hume against the allegation of fallacy. For he could only reasonably con -
sider the sceptical argument as a refutation of the offending theory of belief if he 
takes that argument to be itself rationally  faultless: the supposed refutation arises 
because our psychological belief fails to match up to genuine  rational requirements.
Hume’s description of the rival theory is more explicit about what it does not 
involve (namely, a “peculiar manner of conception” or “force and vivacity”) than 
about its positive account (of belief as “a simple act of the thought”). Donald Ainslie 
attempts to fill this out, identifying Hume’s target here as a conception of rational 
belief developed by the ancient Stoics and revived by Descartes and Malebranche, 
which relies on assent  or an act of will  (Ainslie, Hume’s True Scepticism , 27–28), thus 
conceiving of belief as standardly self-conscious and deliberative:
Where Hume models belief on the basis of our unreflective thinking, the 
Stoics and their early-modern descendants take the opposite approach, 
modelling belief on the self-conscious reasoning we undertake when 
trying to be sure to get things right. And so they treat what Hume calls 
the “reflex act of the mind,” whereby we consider whether a perceived 
connection should be accepted, not as an option that we sometimes 
exercise, but as necessary in every belief. (Ainslie, 30)
This model of the mind portrays us as “standing over” the deliverances of our 
mental faculties, and “takes us to be as it were superintendents of our mental pro -
cesses, where the superintendent is different in kind and superior to that which Hume Studies188 Peter Millican
it oversees . . . [with] the ability to withhold our cognitive commitments until all 
the considerations have been properly taken into account” (Ainslie, 31).
But this view of ourselves as overseers or superintendents of our mental 
processes was by no means confined to Stoics and Cartesians, for it seems to be 
implicit in the mental taxonomies that were widely accepted for most of the early 
modern period. Arnauld and Nicole’s influential Port Royal Logic  describes “the four 
principal operations of the mind: conceiving, judging, reasoning, and ordering ” (23). 
John Locke gives a somewhat similar fourfold distinction: first, “the discovering 
. . . of Proofs” (that is, intermediate ideas); second, “the laying [Proofs] in a clear 
and fit Order, to make their Connexion and Force be plainly and easily perceived”; 
third, “the perceiving their Connexion”; and fourth, “the making a right conclu -
sion” ( Essay , IV xvii 3). Colin Drummond, who taught Hume logic at Edinburgh, 
preferred a threefold taxonomy of apprehension, judgment , and discourse , explicitly 
rejecting method  as overblown by the Cartesians.37 Hume himself, in a long foot -
note at T 1.3.7.5 (SBN 96–97), challenges the “establish’d maxim . . . universally 
receiv’d by all logicians [which] consists in the vulgar divisions of the acts of the 
understanding, into conception, judgment  and reasoning .”38 This orthodoxy was 
long-lived, as witnessed by Thomas Reid’s much later report that “[t]he intel -
lectual powers [of the mind] are commonly divided into simple apprehension, 
judgment, and reasoning” (I.vii, 65). All of these taxonomies treat judgment  as 
distinct from reasoning , thus suggesting a structure in which the judgment stands 
over  (Ainslie’s term) the deliverances of the other operations of reason in drawing 
its conclusions. This kind of hierarchical structure is made even more explicit by 
Francis Hutcheson, in a Latin teaching text published soon after Hume’s Treatise , 
where he says that our “ senses  report to the understanding ,” and he explains the 
function of memory as being to preserve for the mind “all the furniture of ideas 
that the faculty of judging and reasoning makes use of” (1 12, 121). On the basis 
of such passages, I have elsewhere described the dominant orthodoxy in terms 
similar to Ainslie’s: the mental faculties form “a hierarchical structure, with . . . 
various powers ‘reporting to’ an overseer  faculty—reason or the understanding 
proper—which perceives and judges the deliverances of the subordinate faculties 
in order to establish truth.”39
Ainslie’s suggestion that Hume’s Regress Argument is targeting this view can 
indeed help to make sense of the quotations from T 1.4.1.8 (SBN 183–84) above. 
There, Hume contrasts his own “hypothesis, . . . that belief is  . . . an act of the sensi -
tive . . . part of our natures  . . . [and involves a] peculiar manner of conception, or 
the addition of a force and vivacity,” with the rival established theory that “belief 
[is] a simple act of the thought, without any peculiar manner of conception.” And 
Hume here particularly emphasises two related aspects of his theory which would 
be in tension with the overseer model, namely that he sees belief as arising from 
the causal operation of custom , and as doing so in a manner that “ ’tis impossible Volume 44, Number 2, 2018189 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
for mere ideas and reflections to destroy.” The previous paragraph (T 1.4.1.7; SBN 
183) also stresses these same two points, in the course of explaining why the Re -
gress Argument fails in practice to undermine our beliefs (even though, as noted 
earlier, we can “find no error” in it):
Nature, by an absolute and uncontroulable necessity has determin’d us to 
judge as well as to breathe and feel; nor can we any more forbear viewing 
certain objects in a stronger and fuller light, upon account of their custom -
ary connexion with a present impression, than we can hinder ourselves 
from thinking as long as we are awake, or seeing the surrounding bodies, 
when we turn our eyes towards them in broad sun-shine.
On Hume’s theory as developed in Treatise  1.3.6–12, the operation of custom auto -
matically  enhances the vivacity of ideas, generating the “manner of conception” 
or distinctive feeling  that constitutes belief,40 in a way that is entirely involuntary 
and leaves no room for any supervisory “act of assent” by some faculty of rational 
oversight.41 Thus if, as Hume suggests at T 1.4.1.8 (SBN 183–84), the point of the 
Regress Argument is indeed to support his theory of belief, then it is plausible to 
see it as doing so by providing a would-be reductio  of the overseer model.
Understanding the Regress Argument as performing this role, however, can -
not absolve Hume of its logical errors. For thus interpreted, Hume’s attack on the 
overseer model of reason is based on an alleged mismatch with our actual doxastic 
behaviour, and in particular, the fact that we continue to hold beliefs despite the 
contrary imperative of the Regress Argument. The Humean challenge to that model 
is thus empirical  rather than purely conceptual , and does not dispute the supposed 
obligation of reason “to withhold our cognitive commitments until all the con -
siderations have been properly taken into account” and hence to engage in the 
iterated reflection that generates the sceptical regress (Ainslie, 31).42 Indeed, such 
an attack can be effective only on the supposition that the obligation of reason is 
genuine. For if it were not—if it turned out that we had no rational obligation to 
enter the sceptical regress even if doing so were psychologically possible for us—
then Hume’s attempt to show that the overseer model would lead to a complete 
loss of belief would clearly fail. So to the extent that we have evidence—as Ainslie 
plausibly provides—that the overseer model is indeed a significant Humean target  
here, we have more justification (rather than less) for taking the supposed rational 
obligation to be something that Hume accepts , at least in the Treatise . This was a 
serious mistake on his part, as we have seen in sections 5 and 6 above. But I shall 
now argue that he himself later recognised this mistake, and decisively corrected 
it in the first Enquiry .Hume Studies190 Peter Millican
9. Hume’s Abandonment of the Regress Argument
Hume’s Regress Argument is, I have argued, fundamentally flawed, and there is 
no way of saving it. But Hume is generally a much better philosopher—and far 
more logically astute—than this fallacious argument would suggest, and I believe 
that he himself soon came to see its flaws, most likely when attempting to spell 
it out more clearly. After publishing the Treatise , Hume quickly started reviewing 
both his philosophical positions and his presentation of them, and even before 
Book 3 was published, the 1740 Abstract  shows him reassessing and reorganising 
the material of Book 1 in the direction of what would become the first Enquiry  of 
1748.43 Although the Enquiry  omits many topics that were covered in the Treatise  (for 
example space and time, materialism and the soul, personal identity), and omits 
or downplays the detailed associationist psychology (most notably in discussing 
belief, probability, and the external world), nevertheless it tends to expand on, 
rather than abbreviate, the most philosophically central discussions that it does 
include (notably regarding induction, necessary connexion, free will, and attitudes 
to scepticism). Also, and strikingly, the presentations in the Enquiry  are illustrated 
with vastly more examples than those in the Treatise , and these examples are 
typically more highly developed.44 Hence it seems very likely that when working 
towards the Enquiry  and considering his treatment of scepticism within it, Hume 
would have endeavoured to spell out his novel and shocking Regress Argument 
more explicitly than he did in Treatise  1.4.1, illustrating it with some appropriate 
example(s) to make its coherence and implications clear. I tried, unsuccessfully, 
to do just this in sections 5–6 above, with my example of the quadratic equation, 
and feel confident that Hume would likewise have failed. His argument purports 
to apply to any reasoning whatever, but in reality, it is hard to invent even a single 
case  in which iteration makes sense beyond a few stages.45 Even to the extent that 
it does make sense, moreover, there is no compelling reason to expect that it will 
lead towards “extinction of belief” (T 1.4.1.6; SBN 183). So if, in the early 1740s, 
Hume attempted to polish his argument to the presentational standards of the 
Enquiry —and, in particular, to elucidate it with examples—then he must surely 
have recognised its inadequacies for himself.
The consequences of this discovery for the overall development of Hume’s 
philosophy are less evident, though we can hazard some plausible speculations, 
corroborated by traces in the Enquiry  (despite the lack of any explicit mention of 
the argument there). The Regress Argument was novel and ingenious, and might 
also have particularly appealed to Hume as providing an attractive synthesis be -
tween the Pyrrhonian “mode of infinite regress” and the probable appearances 
accepted by Academic sceptics. If, however, its probabilistic ingenuities fail, then 
all we seem to be left with is the relatively crude iterative requirement to question Volume 44, Number 2, 2018191 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
our sources of assurance, effectively reducing the argument to the second sceptical 
mode of Agrippa, as expounded by Sextus Empiricus:46
In the mode deriving from infinite regress, we say that what is brought 
forward as a source of conviction for the matter proposed itself needs 
another such source, which itself needs another, and so ad infinitum , so 
that we have no point from which to begin to establish anything, and 
suspension of judgement follows. ( Outlines of Scepticism , I.166, 41)
Hume’s dismissive comment about the “trite topics, employed by the sceptics in 
all ages” (EHU 12.6; SBN 151) suggests that he would not want to give weight to 
such a crude and hackneyed sceptical argument. It seems obviously unanswerable 
if one accepts the premise that any “source of conviction” must be backed up by 
“another such source . . . ad infinitum .” And for anyone aspiring to achieve justified 
belief, it accordingly serves as a reductio ad absurdum of that premise, demonstrating 
that any serious epistemology must at least be prepared to take some “source of 
conviction” for granted if it is to get off the ground. Based on this line of thought, 
it is tempting to see, in the first Enquiry’ s forthright rejection of antecedent scepti -
cism, an implicit acknowledgement of the Regress Argument’s failure:47
There is a species of scepticism, antecedent  to all study and philosophy, 
which is much inculcated by Des Cartes  and others, . . . It recommends 
an universal doubt . . . of our very faculties; of whose veracity, say they, 
we must assure ourselves, by a chain of reasoning, deduced from some 
original principle, which cannot possibly be fallacious or deceitful. But 
neither is there any such original principle, . . . Or if there were, could we 
advance a step beyond it, but by the use of those very faculties, of which 
we are supposed to be already diffident. The Cartesian  doubt, therefore, 
were it ever possible to be attained by any human creature (as it plainly 
is not) would be entirely incurable; and no reasoning could ever bring 
us to a state of assurance and conviction upon any subject. (EHU 12.3; 
SBN 149–50)
Hume here interprets such scepticism as demanding prior  verification of our fac -
ulties before we are permitted to rely on them, which plausibly fits both with the 
sceptical mode’s iterating demand for a “source of conviction,” and the Regress 
Argument’s iterating demand for probabilistic confirmation.48 He now rejects this 
as obviously hopeless, in putting an onus on the believer to justify his epistemic 
faculties against the sceptic ab initio . Far more appropriate is to accept the believer’s 
reasonable default assumptions (plausible examples being that external objects exist, 
that memory is broadly reliable, that clear and distinct conceivability implies possibil -Hume Studies192 Peter Millican
ity, and that the future will resemble the past ), and to put an onus on the skeptic to 
defeat these assumptions by showing “either the absolute fallaciousness of [our] 
mental faculties, or their unfitness to reach any fixed determination” (EHU 12.5; 
SBN 150). This strategy thus involves a rejection of antecedent  skepticism in favour 
of what Hume here calls consequent  skepticism. Faced with such a challenge, the 
skeptic cannot win by lazily iterating abstract doubts, as the skeptical mode or 
the Regress Argument would prescribe; instead, he must actively present some 
compelling objection  to our epistemic faculties, apparently in the form of either 
some contradiction or incoherence (“absolute fallaciousness”), or else irremediable 
empirical unreliability (“unfitness to reach any fixed determination”).
Hume demonstrates the effectiveness of this strategy in his rejection of ex -
treme skepticism later in section 12 of the Enquiry , notably in the central case of 
induction. First, he dismisses the “ popular ” objections to “reasonings concerning 
matter of fact”—those deriving from natural error and differences of opinion 
according to circumstance—as “but weak” (EHU 12.21; SBN 158), just as he had 
earlier rejected the “trite topics . . . against the evidence of sense ” (EHU 12.6; SBN 
151). Such objections show only that we must rationally correct  our judgments and 
take circumstances into account; they cannot realistically hope to persuade us to 
disregard completely either sensory or inductive evidence. More substantial are 
the “ philosophical  objections, which arise from more profound researches” (EHU 
12.22; SBN 159), and in particular, Hume’s own skeptical argument of Enquiry  sec-
tion 4 which he now puts into the mouth of the skeptic. That argument seems to 
give the skeptic “ample matter of triumph; while he justly insists” on our lack of 
rational grounding  for the assumption of uniformity which underlies all our infer -
ence to unperceived matters of fact. But against this, the skeptic cannot point to any 
advantage in our giving up that assumption : “On the contrary, he must acknowledge, 
if he will acknowledge any thing, that all human life must perish” were we “uni -
versally and steadily” to relinquish inductive inference (EHU 12.23; SBN 160). Nor 
can he demonstrate any fundamental problem—such as logical inconsistency—in 
the assumption of uniformity. So if we start from default acceptance  of our natural 
faculty of inductive inference, then the skeptical argument is disarmed. Ultimately, 
therefore, that argument “can have no other tendency than to show the whimsi -
cal condition of mankind, who must act and reason and believe; though they 
are not able, by their most diligent enquiry, to satisfy themselves concerning the 
foundation of these operations.” But notice that our continuing in this whimsical 
condition—that is, reasoning inductively without any foundational basis—can be 
epistemologically  legitimate only because the traditional Cartesian onus of proof 
has been shifted. And it is Hume’s dismissal of antecedent skepticism at EHU 12.3 
(SBN 149–50) which has prepared the ground for this shift, enabling induction to 
survive the skeptical onslaught undefeated, even though we would be unable to 
establish its credentials in advance against the skeptic.Volume 44, Number 2, 2018193 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
There is another possible relic of the Regress Argument in the very next 
paragraph of the Enquiry , where Hume approvingly mentions a “more moderate” 
version of antecedent skepticism:
To begin with clear and self-evident principles, to advance by timorous 
and sure steps, to review frequently our conclusions, and examine ac -
curately all their consequences; though by these means we shall make 
both a slow and a short progress in our systems; are the only methods, 
by which we can ever hope to reach truth, and attain a proper stability 
and certainty in our determinations. (EHU 12.4; SBN 150)
Here he retains from the Treatise  the acknowledgement that we are fallible, and 
that checking is therefore desirable to maximise the reliability of our judgments. 
But instead of iterating to progressively higher levels, he now advocates checking 
at the base level only, taking care “to advance by timorous and sure steps, to review 
frequently our conclusions, and examine accurately all their consequences.”49 
This is in striking contrast to the method advocated in Treatise  1.4.1, and similar 
in spirit to the views suggested near the beginning of section 6 above in rejecting 
the Regress Argument, thus tending to confirm that Hume himself has, by now, 
seen what is wrong with that argument. More evidence to the same effect comes 
at EHU 12.18 (SBN 156), where he says that “The chief objection against all abstract  
reasonings is derived from the ideas of space and time,” which would not be the 
case if the Regress Argument worked. Taking all this together, we have good reason 
to conclude that Hume omitted the Regress Argument from the Enquiry  not merely 
for the sake of brevity, but because he had by 1748 recognised its failure.
10. Conclusion: The Significance of Hume’s Regress Argument
Although Hume’s Regress Argument is fallacious, it has an interpretative signifi -
cance out of all proportion to its philosophical merits. When writing the Treatise , 
Hume himself evidently found it epistemologically—though not psychologi -
cally—compelling, and gave it pride of place at the very beginning of his extended 
treatment of skepticism in Book 1, part 4. There it sets the tone for much of what 
follows, emphasising both the extreme skeptical thrust of his philosophy, and the 
strong divergence between his negative epistemological conclusions and his psy -
chological compulsion to believe. Both of these themes come to a head briefly at 
the end of section 1.4.2 (where Hume stresses commonalities between the first two 
sections), and then in a far more sustained manner in the Conclusion of Book 1.
In that concluding section 1.4.7, it is the disastrous upshot of his “scepticism 
with regard to reason” that plays the crucial role in wrecking any prospect for a 
rational resolution of Hume’s difficulties, by undermining the distinction that he Hume Studies194 Peter Millican
had meanwhile prominently introduced at the beginning of his discussion “Of 
the modern philosophy”:
In order to justify myself, I must distinguish in the imagination betwixt 
the principles which are permanent, irresistible, and universal; such as the 
customary transition from causes to effects, and from effects to causes: And 
the principles, which are changeable, weak, and irregular; . . . the former 
are received by philosophy, and the latter rejected. (T 1.4.4.1; SBN 225)
At T 1.4.7.7 (SBN 267), Hume characterises this distinction as being between, 
on the one hand, “the general and more establish’d properties of the imagina -
tion”—which he identifies with “the understanding”—and on the other hand, 
“the trivial suggestions of the fancy.” By then the distinction has already been 
put under some pressure from the discovery that there is “a direct and total op -
position” between “those conclusions we form from cause and effect, and those 
that persuade us of the continu’d and independent existence of body” (T 1.4.4.15, 
recalled at T 1.4.7.4; SBN 231, 266). But the killer blow comes from what Hume calls 
“a very dangerous dilemma” as to whether we should, in our reasonings, restrict 
ourselves to the “general” and respectable principles while rejecting those that are 
“trivial” and disreputable. There is an obvious argument in favour of doing so: “For 
if we assent to every trivial suggestion of the fancy; beside that these suggestions 
are often contrary to each other; they lead us into such errors, absurdities, and 
obscurities, that we must at last become asham’d of our credulity.” (T 1.4.7.6; SBN 
267). In response, however, the result of Treatise  1.4.1 makes an entrance, with 
devastating effect:
For I have already shewn, [Note: Sect. 1] that the understanding, when it 
acts alone, and according to its most general principles, entirely subverts 
itself, and leaves not the lowest degree of evidence in any proposition, 
either in philosophy or common life. We save ourselves from this total 
scepticism only by means of that singular and seemingly trivial prop -
erty of the fancy, by which we enter with difficulty into remote views of 
things, . . . (T 1.4.7.7; SBN 267–68)
This last sentence alludes to T 1.4.1.10 (SBN 185), where Hume explained the Re -
gress Argument’s failure to undermine our beliefs by appeal to our fortunate—but 
“seemingly trivial”—incapacity to follow its intricacies beyond the first couple 
of levels.50 Taking this as a model, we might then be tempted to “establish it for a 
general maxim, that no refin’d or elaborate reasoning is ever to be receiv’d” (thus 
perhaps elevating such a maxim to the “establish’d” side of Hume’s distinction), 
but unfortunately this would both “cut off entirely all science and philosophy” Volume 44, Number 2, 2018195 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
and undermine the “refin’d and metaphysical” reasoning that has led us to this 
very point. Summing up: “If we . . . condemn all refin’d reasoning, we run into 
the most manifest absurdities. If we [accept refin’d reasoning], we subvert entirely 
the human understanding. We have, therefore, no choice left but betwixt a false 
reason and none at all. For my part, I know not what ought to be done” (T 1.4.7.7; 
SBN 268). It is this dilemma that provokes the apparently genuine despair in the 
next paragraph, where Hume declares that he is “ready to reject all belief and 
reasoning, and can look upon no opinion even as more probable or likely than 
another” (T 1.4.7.8; SBN 268–69). He famously moves forward from this despair 
thanks to nature , which “cures me of this philosophical melancholy and delirium 
.  .  . I dine, I play a game of back-gammon, I converse, and am merry with my 
friends,” and this enables him to forget these speculations and later to reject them 
as “cold, and strain’d, and ridiculous” (T 1.4.7.9; SBN 269). There is much debate 
about how these and the following paragraphs should be interpreted, but this is 
not the time to examine such a vexed question.51 What is entirely clear, however, 
is that the problems with which Hume is grappling here are largely created—and 
hugely intensified—by his skepticism with regard to reason and the Regress Argu -
ment in particular.
Given this context, it seems very likely that Hume’s philosophy—and in 
particular his view on skepticism—would have changed significantly if he had 
come to see that his Regress Argument was a failure. I argued in sections 5 and 6 
above that it was indeed a failure, whose superficial plausibility evaporates under 
close analysis, such as Hume himself might have been expected to undertake in 
any future exposition, and in particular when composing the Philosophical Essays 
which became the first Enquiry  (a work liberally supplied with persuasive illustra -
tive examples which—in the case of the Regress Argument—seem impossible to 
devise). In section 9, I corroborated this suggestion with textual evidence of Hume’s 
having realised, at some stage before publishing this work in 1748, that the Regress 
Argument is seriously flawed. Indeed the first Enquiry  manifests all the signs that we 
might reasonably expect to result from such a realisation:52 neither the argument 
itself, nor the difficulties to which it gave rise in the Treatise , is even mentioned 
or alluded to; Hume’s judgments on the two varieties of antecedent skepticism 
seem to rule out the need for higher-level iterative reflection and to recommend 
instead mundane base-level checking; while the overall skeptical orientation set 
out in the final section of the Enquiry  is explicitly “mitigated” (EHU 12.24–34; SBN 
161–65), a description which cannot plausibly apply to the radical all-embracing 
skepticism of Treatise  1.4.1, nor to the tortured skeptical conundrums of Treatise  
1.4.7. Moreover, a crucial aspect of this mitigation involves a fundamental change 
of perspective in which the onus is put on the skeptic rather than the believer, 
a change which can very naturally be seen as a legacy of Hume’s rejection of the 
“antecedent” skeptical spirit that motivated his Regress Argument.Hume Studies196 Peter Millican
NOTES
For helpful feedback on this paper, I am very grateful to Louis Loeb, Kevin Meeker, 
Benjamin Nelson, David Owen, Hsueh Qu, the Editors and two anonymous referees 
for Hume Studies .
1  Hume explicitly refers to this argument no fewer than three times in other sections 
of the Treatise  (T 1.3.13.5n24, 1.3.13.17n26, and 1.4.7.7n53; SBN 146, 153, 267), and 
twice implicitly (in the first and last paragraphs of the following section, at T 1.4.2.1 and 
1.4.2.57; SBN 187, 218). T 1.3.13.5 (SBN 146) talks of it as exhibiting a “very memorable” 
point “which is of vast consequence” for the understanding, presumably alluding to 
its huge significance in the Conclusion of Book 1. References to the Treatise  are indi -
cated by “T” and given to Book, part, section and paragraph number. References to the 
Enquiry concerning Human Understanding  are indicated by “EHU” and given to section 
and paragraph number. The Norton edition of the Treatise  includes the Abstract  of 
the Treatise  and the Appendix to the Treatise  (references indicated by “Abs” and “App” 
respectively, and given to paragraph number). References to these works are also given 
“SBN” page numbers, referring to the Clarendon Press editions by L. A. Selby-Bigge, 
revised by P . H. Nidditch.
2  Immerwahr, “A Skeptic’s Progress,” 234, from whom this quote is taken, draws 
the reasonable conclusion that this gives good “reason for thinking that Hume is dis -
satisfied with this argument.”
3  Kemp Smith, Philosophy of David Hume , 447–9, quotes only a few extracts from 
Treatise  1.4.1, ignoring the crucial argument; Penelhum, Hume , 198n7 and Stroud, 
Hume,  268n14, barely mention the argument; while Capaldi and Flew fail to mention 
it entirely. Many books from more recent years have also continued this pattern.These broader points regarding the development of Hume’s skeptical outlook 
between the Treatise  and the Enquiry  have been touched on only briefly here, and 
will be controversial. Indeed the standard assumption amongst Hume interpret -
ers has been, to the contrary, that his skepticism underwent no major doctrinal 
change in the 1740s, with most scholars either treating his work as a unified cor -
pus, or else entirely neglecting the Enquiry , often apparently on the presumption 
that its differences from the Treatise  are a result of the “shortening & simplifying” 
that he mentioned in a letter of 1751 ( Letters , 1:158).53 Doctrinal continuity might 
indeed be a natural default assumption, but I hope that the results of this paper 
give reason to question it, and will encourage more scholars to examine whether 
there are, in fact, significant theoretical  differences between Hume’s skepticism 
in the Treatise  and in the Enquiry , including some that may be directly traceable 
to his having become aware of the Regress Argument’s faults. If, as I expect, such 
investigations prove fruitful,54 then this will confirm that although the argument 
is philosophically a failure, it remains of huge interpretative significance for the 
development of Hume’s epistemology.Volume 44, Number 2, 2018197 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
4  Wilson, “Hume’s Sceptical Argument,” 93, describes “the received opinion” as be -
ing “that Hume’s inference is quite obviously  erroneous,” apparently taking the standard 
objections (which he counters at 101–5) to be those of Prichard and MacNabb, “Hume.” 
DeWitt, “Hume’s Probability Argument,” 136–7n3, includes only Popkin and Wilson 
as being “clearly sympathetic” to the argument, notes Von Wright, Logical Problem , 
153; cf. 223n15, as also accepting it, while listing Stove, Probability , 131–2, and Laird, 
Hume’s Philosophy , 176 as strongly rejecting the argument, and six other commenta -
tors as ambivalent. Morris, “Hume’s Scepticism,” 39, laments that “Even a sympathetic 
recent commentator calls [the argument] a ‘morass,’ while another commentator . . . 
regards the argument as ‘not merely defective, but one of the worst arguments ever to 
impose itself on a man of genius’”—footnotes clarify that these references are to Fogelin, 
Hume’s Skepticism , 16, and Stove, Probability , 132.
5  Recent defenders include Dauer; Lynch; Lolordo; Garrett (“Hume’s Conclusion,” 
160–63; Hume , 223–6); Wright, Hume’s Treatise , 133–35; Meeker, Hume’s Radical Scepti -
cism , chap. 2–3; Owen; Nelson; Atkinson and Peijnenburg; and Garfield, Concealed 
Influence,  chap. 8. In addition, Baier, Progress of Sentiments , 60–61; Allison, Custom and 
Reason , chap. 8; Schmitt, Hume’s Epistemology , chap. 1 1; and Ainslie, Hume’s True Scepti -
cism , chap. 1—like Morris—defend the argument in the role of a reductio  (of some rival 
conception of either reason or belief: these approaches will be discussed in sections 7 
and 8 below).
6  See pages 102–8 of Arithmeticae et algebrae compendium. In usum juventutis 
academicae , published in 1736 at Edinburgh by David Gregory, who was Professor of 
Mathematics at St Andrews from 1739–64, and whose uncle James Gregory was Profes -
sor of Mathematics at Edinburgh when Hume attended in 1721–5.
7  For defence of this Sorites argument, see Meeker and Poston, “Skeptics without 
Borders,” 227–9, who draw interesting comparisons with the structurally similar “anti-
luminosity” argument influentially advanced by Williamson, Knowledge , chap. 4.
8  As claimed, for example, by Garrett, ( Cognition and Commitment , 150, 253n8; 
Hume , 304–6), in the context of discussing Hume’s argument against the credibility of 
testimony for miracles.
9  Fogelin, Hume’s Skepticism , 15, takes this point to be clear, but it is critically dis -
cussed by Morris, “Hume’s Scepticism,” 43–6, and Allison, Custom and Reason , 214–9, 
as well as by Meeker and Poston (see note 7 above).
10  Hence the sceptical implications of the Regress Argument are intended to apply 
to all beliefs derived from reasoning, whether initially demonstrative (as in the Uncer -
tainty Argument) or probable.
11  Despite Hume’s talk of our being “oblig’d by our reason” and “the rules of logic,” 
Owen interprets Hume’s argument as being more descriptive  than normative , exhibiting 
not so much a theoretical obligation as a practical risk: “The point is not that a belief, 
with full force and vigor, is seen to be unjustified; rather, it is that because the force 
and vigor continually decrease, the idea seems in danger of ceasing to be a belief at 
all” (“Scepticism,” 1 13). Lolordo, likewise, while showing sympathy for the supposed 
normative obligation (“Probability and Skepticism” , 433, 437, 442, 446), appears to 
explain the regress in descriptive terms, as arising because we “feel compelled to add 
considerations about the reliability of our faculties into the chain of reasoning leading Hume Studies198 Peter Millican
to the original proposition” (437). Such descriptivist interpretations are empirically 
implausible: most of us feel no such compulsion, and as Hume himself acknowledges 
at T 1.4.1.7 (SBN 183), there is no practical  risk of our beliefs dissipating regressively 
in anything like this way. So, if “total extinction of belief” (T 1.4.1.6; SBN 183) is sup -
posed to be a prediction of a descriptive  psychological theory, rather than a normative  
requirement, that descriptive theory would have to be rejected as an empirical failure. 
It would then be hard to see why Hume should see this prediction as such a potent 
epistemological  threat (most notably at Treatise  1.4.7.7; SBN 267–8).
12  All this is not to deny that Hume often treats probability in a predominantly 
psychological manner, with little regard to its quantitative aspects. But within Treatise  
1.4.1 itself, it is clear that he is treating probabilities and degrees of evidence as compa -
rable (“greater or less”) and subject to arithmetical reduction (at paragraphs 1, 3, 6, 8, 
and 9; SBN 180–5). Hence any rigorous treatment of Hume’s Regress Argument has to 
build on some explicit mathematical interpretation of Humean probabilities, and the 
theory sketched here, I believe, provides the best combination of coherence and textual 
fidelity. For its application to Hume’s Maxim on miracles (EHU 10.13; SBN 1 15–16), see 
Millican, “Twenty Questions,” 162n12.
13  Maher, “Probability,” 141, proposes a somewhat similar theory, except that his vi-
vacities  cannot be negative, and hence are set to 0 in cases where my own method would 
yield a negative credibility . This seems plausibly Humean, but too vague to provide the 
basis of a useful calculus of probabilities. For example, the prediction that one tossed 
coin will land heads-up would have vivacity  0, exactly the same as 100 tossed coins all 
landing heads-up together, and more generally the vivacity  of a disjunction of exclusive 
propositions would not be a well-defined function of the component vivacities .
14  Keynes, Treatise  on Probability , 313, calls this “Bernoulli’s maxim,” citing Jacob 
Bernoulli’s Ars Conjectandi , 215.
15  To avoid any risk of confusion here, note that what Morris calls “the first stage 
of assessment” is the first reflective  stage, which involves making what I am calling a 
second-level  judgment. Enumerating the levels in this way means that our fourth-level 
judgment will nicely coincide with what Hume at T 1.4.1.6 (SBN 182) calls the “fourth 
doubt.”
16  See, for example Dauer, “Hume’s Scepticism,” 214, who quotes Morris approvingly, 
and Lynch, “Limits of Reason,” 96. Owen is less committal, remarking that “Our inher -
ent fallibility is always a consideration, weakening the force with which the original 
belief is held,” and “this sort of judgment can reiterate” (“Scepticism,” 1 13). For more 
on Owen, see note 1 1 above.
17  To be clear, there is no suggestion here that the availability of insurance changes 
my epistemological  situation with regard to the equation’s solution: it simply gives my 
estimate of error a practical significance.
18  Or perhaps of solving quadratic equations that have similarly-sized coefficients, 
or have solutions of the same type (real or complex), or that are similarly factorisable 
(or not). Hume points out that the probability of error must be assessed relative to “the 
simplicity or intricacy of the question” (T 1.4.1.1; SBN 180), but expresses no obvious 
concerns about the difficulty of identifying an appropriate reference class, so we shall 
ignore that complication here.Volume 44, Number 2, 2018199 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
19  MacNabb is credited, for example, by Loeb, Stability and Justification , 224; Allison, 
Custom and Reason , 223; and Owen, “Scepticism,” 1 13–4. Allison and Owen find the 
objection ultimately unconvincing, while Loeb appears to accept it, albeit with some 
ambivalence.
20  Loeb, Stability and Justification , 224–9, suggests a possible alternative explanation, 
whereby Hume conflated estimates of likelihood with degrees of confidence , owing to his 
interpretation of both in terms of vivacity of ideas: “Hume takes degree of confidence 
to consist in degree of vivacity. But the only degree of vivacity in sight is the one that 
constitutes [the] . . . estimate of likelihood. So Hume supposes we reduce that  vivacity, 
thus initiating the series of reductions” (229).
21  A zero limit is not strictly implied unless we add some upper bound (less than cer -
tainty) on the relevant probabilities, for example, “each of which has a probability less 
than 1–ε, where ε>0.” Reid, Essays , VII.iv, 569, presses this as an objection against Hume’s 
argument, pointing out that “an infinite series of quantities decreasing in geometrical 
proportion . . . amounts only to a finite sum.” Fogelin acknowledges Reid’s point, but 
replies that Hume “need only argue that there is some finite degree of probability below 
which the chance of error never falls” ( Hume’s Skepticism , 17, 174n4). This reply—which 
is cited approvingly by Dauer, “Hume’s Scepticism,” 214, and Owen, “Scepticism,” 
1 15—indeed seems reasonable, since in practice Hume’s reflective series would quickly 
lead to judgments of which we are unlikely to feel anything like 100% certain. All this 
mathematical detail, however, is irrelevant against the more fundamental objections 
urged in the current paper.
22  Precisely because Hume’s regress should be towards indifference  rather than certain 
falsehood , the most coherent interpretations of his argument do not involve simple 
multiplication of probabilities —a fault particularly evident in the reconstruction by 
DeWitt, “Hume’s Probability Argument”—but instead successive undermining of 
evidential force . Amongst recent scholars, Owen, “Scepticism,” 1 13–4, is most explicit 
about this connection, but see also for example Morris, “Hume’s Scepticism,” 50–3; 
Lynch, “Limits of Reason,” 94; Lolordo, “Probability and Skepticism,” 437–8; Garrett, 
(“Hume’s Conclusions,” 162–3; Hume , 224–5); and Allison, Custom and Reason , 223–5.
23  If any judgment is to be considered worthy of belief only if it is accompanied by a 
higher-level judgment to the effect that the original judgment is well-founded— testify -
ing, so to speak, to its credibility—then a sceptical iteration evidently results (of a form 
that might plausibly be suggested by the analogy with chains of testimony). Dauer’s and 
Garrett’s interpretations of Hume’s argument (sketched in note 46 below) take roughly 
this form. Wilson, “Hume’s Sceptical Argument,” claims most explicitly that Hume’s 
argument should indeed be understood “in the context of an analogy with a chain of 
testimony” (105), basing this on Hume’s use of the word “authority” at T 1.4.1.5; SBN 
182 (94). The word “testimony” occurs just once in T 1.4.1, but this is in the very first 
paragraph when referring to the “testimony” of “our understanding” about a first -level 
judgment (SBN 180); so this provides little support for Wilson’s interpretation.
24  This point is familiar in the literature concerning Hume on miracles, since it 
underlies a long-standing objection to him—going back to Babbage, Ninth Bridgewater 
Treatise , and more recently urged by Earman, Abject Failure , chap. 18—based on the pos -
sibility of convincing evidence for a miracle deriving from large numbers of independent  
witnesses. Ahmed, “Independent Witnesses,” defends Hume, providing mathematical Hume Studies200 Peter Millican
analysis to highlight the serious difficulty of knowing  (or even being confident), in any 
situation that might be thought to be of this kind, that the witnesses are genuinely  
independent in the appropriate sense.
25  In recent years, a popular way of defending Hume’s argument against the Reid/
MacNabb objection has been to interpret Hume’s regress not as involving a progressive 
reduction of a particular probability (or credibility), but rather, an expanding “margin 
of error”: see, for example, Lynch, “Limits of Reason,” 94; Bennett, Six Philosophers , 315; 
Wright, Hume’s Treatise , 134–5; and Owen, “Scepticism,” 1 14–5. I find these proposals 
technically problematic (for reasons that need not concern us here), and inconsistent 
with Hume’s view of probabilities as having specific degrees corresponding to levels of 
psychological vivacity of belief that are straightforwardly comparable  (that is, greater, 
less, or equal). Atkinson and Peijnenburg, “Hume’s Treatise 1.4.1,” section 6, suggest 
instead on Hume’s behalf that the point of the argument is diminution of the probabi -
listic impact of successive iterations, but this seems hard to square with the significance 
that Hume accords the argument. In any case, none of these approaches can defend 
his argument against the more fundamental problems urged in section 6 below.
26  In the case of a quadratic equation, for example, I might check how accurately 
the standard formula has been applied, then also check that the solution(s) yielded by 
the formula work correctly when plugged back into the equation, then even perhaps 
try a range of further values of the quadratic function and sketch the corresponding 
(parabolic) graph. If all these checks succeed and thus corroborate each other, this gives 
strong evidence that the solution is correct.
27  This is another point well made by Reid: “If he should afterwards find reason to 
suspect his first judgment, . . . reason will direct him not to form such a series of estima -
tions upon estimations, as this author requires, but to examine the evidence of his first 
judgment carefully and coolly; and this review may very reasonably, according to its 
result, either strengthen or weaken, or totally overturn his first judgment” ( Essays , VII.
iv, 570). Reid thus alleges (without fully explaining) that Hume’s requirement to form 
an iterative “series of estimations upon estimations” is bogus. The current section aims 
to show in detail that this allegation is correct, something not previously achieved as 
far as I am aware.
28  This issue can be illuminated by considering how one might design a computer 
program to implement such iterative reflection. At the first level, let us suppose, equa -
tions are entered by the user and solved by formula. These results are then passed to 
the second level, which checks them (presumably using some other method, cf. note 
26 above) and collates statistics of accuracy. Then what? Even to attempt a third level 
of checking, the program needs some way of assessing the accuracy of its second-level 
assessments, and unless there is some outside “oracle” to give relevant input here, the 
program can only do this assessment by relying on the same mathematical methods 
that it has used at the first two levels. Thus third- and higher-level assessment looks 
utterly pointless. Note also that faulty implementation of such higher-level processes 
would have no impact whatever on the system’s accuracy at the first two levels, a moral 
that seems to apply equally to the human case: excellence at arithmetic—and being 
well aware of one’s excellence—need not require any skill in high-level reflective self-
assessment.Volume 44, Number 2, 2018201 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
29  Moreover, given the host of alternative possible answers to such a problem (as -
suming that it does not occur within a multiple choice exercise), switching from my 
actual answer to guessing an alternative would be most unlikely to get me to the right 
answer even if my reliability were very much lower.
30  Hume’s statement at T 1.4.1.1 (SBN 180) that “Our reason must be consider’d as a 
kind of cause” seems to be intended precisely to highlight that he is here applying his 
method of “probability of causes” (T 1.3.12). This is the only occasion where he talks of 
reason in such a way, and there is no comparable statement elsewhere in his writings.
31  Hence I disagree with Garrett’s apparent view (“Hume’s Conclusions,” 161–3) 
that Hume’s Regress Argument follows from consistent application of the method of 
“probability of causes.” Hume’s discussion of that method in T 1.3.12 gave no hint of 
the sort of aprioristic iterated reflective correction that we see in T 1.4.1, but on the 
contrary was soon followed by the injunction to use experience-informed “general 
rules,” notably those of T 1.3.15.
32  In a similar spirit, Allison (also cited in section 4 above) explains Hume’s regress as 
involving not “how a normal human reasoner ought to perform, but how a maximally 
responsible but fallible reasoner would  proceed” ( Custom and Reason , 223): “Hume is 
arguing counter-factually that if reason were to act alone . . . then the total extinction 
of belief would occur. And, since this does not occur, it follows that our reason does 
not operate in this way” (227). Schmitt likewise sees Hume as considering “a certain 
counterfactual idealization of a human subject, one using reason unlimited by the imagi -
nation ” (Hume’s Epistemology , 321).
33  Morris indicates in an endnote that his phrase “rationally reflective epistemic 
agents” (“Hume’s Scepticism,” 40) is intended to cover pre-Humean “‘Cartesian’ or 
‘rationalist’” conceptions, but to be “forward-looking as well” (59n8). Baier refers to 
“Book One’s reductio  ad absurdum  of Cartesian intellect” ( Progress of Sentiments , 21), and 
says that in part 4, “It is Cartesian-style justification that is sought, and found missing” 
(106), though she admits in an endnote to having “done Descartes an injustice by using 
him as the fall guy in this exposition of Hume’s moves, since the actual Cartesian posi -
tion gives the passions of the soul a vital role to play in the search for truth” (298n16). 
This reductio  line of interpretation was also anticipated by Passmore, Hume’s Intentions , 
135: “Hume, it must be remembered, is working within the Cartesian tradition; and 
within that tradition his argument is effective ad hominem .”
34  This is related to another characteristic of Descartes’s method, that its main focus 
is on avoiding falsehood rather than maximising truth. The Regress Argument, by con -
trast, is directed against those who are comfortable with accepting some  probability of 
falsehood, but would not wish to see that probability raised to the point of indifference.
35  There is also a passage in the 1740 Abstract  which appears to be endorsing Hume’s 
scepticism with regard to reason: “Philosophy would render us entirely Pyrrhonian , were 
not nature too strong for it.” (Abs 27; SBN 657).
36  Some scholars—for instance, Baier, Progress of Sentiments , chap. 1; Singer, “Hume’s 
Extreme Skepticism”; and Garrett, ( Cognition and Commitment , chap. 10; “Hume’s Con -
clusions”)—interpret the apparent dismay in Treatise  1.4.7 as portraying the drama of a 
train of thought, rather than expressing enduring anxieties, and accordingly consider 
Hume’s text to be carefully choreographed and under control. Loeb, Stability and Jus -Hume Studies202 Peter Millican
tification , 16) instead sees genuine destruction, but “delight in the result,” “relish” and 
even “glee” within the chaos. Durland, “Extreme Skepticism,” offers a systematic (but 
ultimately pessimistic) survey and analysis of the various ways in which scholars have 
attempted to reconcile the tensions in this section of the Treatise . See also note 51 below.
37  See Stewart, “Hume’s Intellectual Development,” 13–14. For further relevant ref -
erences to other logicians and writers of the period, see the note on T 1.3.7.5 n. 20 in 
Norton and Norton, Treatise vol. 2, 742.
38  Perhaps significantly, Hume appends this footnote to his own definition of belief 
as “A lively idea related to or associated with a present impression ,” thus po -
tentially corroborating the connection that Ainslie proposes between Hume’s theory 
of belief and his rejection of the “superintendent” or “overseer” model.
39  Millican, “Hume’s ‘Scepticism’ about Induction,” 81, emphasis added. I am en -
couraged to find that Ainslie’s discussion has converged on a similar position from a 
quite different direction, since my own principal focus at the time was Hume’s views 
on induction .
40  From the Abstract  and Appendix  onwards, Hume frequently refers to belief as a 
certain feeling , for example, T 1.3.10.10; App 2–4, 7–8; Abs 22–24; EHU 5.1 1–12; SBN 
630–31, 623–25, 627, 654–55, 48–50. For an insightful discussion of the development 
of these views, see Broackes, “Hume, Belief, and Personal Identity.”
41  However, there is some tension between T 1.4.1.7 (SBN 183), which suggests that 
custom compels belief immediately, without any opportunity for rational oversight, 
and T 1.4.1.10 (SBN 185), which explains that the Regress Argument fails to eliminate 
our beliefs because beyond the first two stages , “the action of the mind becomes forc’d and 
unnatural, and the ideas faint and obscure.” The latter suggests that we can reflectively 
“supervise” our beliefs up to a point. And this fits with Hume’s emphasis elsewhere on 
reflectively disciplined  inductive inference using general rules (for example, T 1.3.10.12, 
1.3.13.1 1–12; SBN 632, 149–50), and in particular his “rules by which to judge of causes 
and effects” (T 1.3.15). Hence his opposition to the overseer model is not as straightfor -
ward as might initially appear.
42  Ainslie’s own discussion of how “the process of checking iterates” ( Hume’s True 
Scepticism , 23) gives the impression that he—like Hume—accepts that the rational 
obligation would apply if the overseer model were correct. Thus we would apparently 
be displaying rational weakness when we fail to follow it through and “soon give up 
the argument, surrendering to our natural inclination to believe our reasoning” (24).
43  The clear parallels between these two works are set out in Millican, Reading Hume , 
52–63. Regarding scepticism, however, the Abstract  provides only one paragraph (Abs 
27; SBN 657), which seems more in line with the Treatise  than with the Enquiry , since 
it appears to endorse Hume’s “scepticism with regard to reason” (see note 35 above).
44  Thus the discussion of the idea of necessary connexion in the Treatise  barely men -
tions the examples of billiard balls (T 1.3.14.18; SBN 164), a couple of mathematical 
relations (T 1.3.14.23; SBN 166), and a blind man’s false suppositions that scarlet is like 
a trumpet sound and light like solidity (T 1.3.14.27; SBN 168); while the parallel discus -
sion in the Enquiry  mentions billiard balls repeatedly (EHU 7.6, 21, 28, 30; SBN 63, 70, 
75, 78), heat and flame (EHU 7.8; SBN 64), the influence of the will on our limbs and Volume 44, Number 2, 2018203 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
other organs (EHU 7.9, 12, 14; SBN 64, 65, 66), a man struck with palsy (EHU 7.13; SBN 
66), our power to raise up a new idea (EHU 7.16; SBN 67), the effects of sickness, time 
of day, and food (EHU 7.19; SBN 68), descent of bodies, growth of plants, generation, 
and nourishment (EHU 7.21; SBN 69), and vibration of a string causing a sound (EHU 
7.29; SBN 77). In the case of induction, the contrast is even starker, with T 1.3.6 briefly 
mentioning only one example (flame and heat at T 1.3.6.2; SBN 87), while EHU section 
4 contains over twenty, some of which are developed extensively (for example, billiard 
balls at EHU 4.8–10; SBN 28–30; momentum at EHU 4.13, 16; SBN 31,33; the nourishing 
qualities of bread at EHU 4.16, 21; SBN 33–4, 37).
45  If this claim is disputed, I offer a Humean challenge: you “have only one, and that 
an easy method of refuting it; by producing” an example where deep iteration makes 
good sense. “I cannot find, I cannot imagine any such [example]. But I keep my mind 
still open to instruction, if any one will vouchsafe to bestow it on me.” (Quotations are 
from EHU 2.6 and 4.20; SBN 19, 36; cf. also EHU 4.16, 23; SBN 34, 39.) To quality as a 
plausible example, it is not enough just to give some formal recipe for iteration—as is 
done, for example, by Garrett (“Hume’s Conclusions,” 162–63; Hume , 224–5) and Atkin -
son and Peijnenburg (“Hume’s Treatise 1.4.1,” sections 3–5)—there must also be some 
explanation of why iteration can reasonably be expected to improve our judgments and 
thus can plausibly be considered a rational obligation. For a comment on Garrett, see 
note 46 below. Atkinson and Peijnenburg provide an iterative sequence of tautological 
(and to that extent unobjectionable) formulae, but we are given no explanation why 
ascending the sequence might be helpful , since the formulae are calculable only on the 
implausible (and unargued) assumption that the relevant conditional probabilities are 
available to us at every level. Moreover, since the formulae involve an arbitrary threshold 
of ¾, it seems that the approach can work for this value only if it works for all values, 
thus requiring—again very implausibly—that the relevant probability distributions 
are identical at every level.
46  See also the “Two Modes” of “the more recent Sceptics” that Sextus presents at 
Outlines  I.178–9. Despite the apparent relative crudity of these sceptical modes, Dauer, 
“Hume’s Scepticism,” 214, 223, and Garrett, Hume , 223–6, understand Hume’s Regress 
Argument in ways that are structurally similar, demanding an infinite hierarchy of in -
creasingly high-level judgments to the effect that the previous judgment in the series 
is respectively “OK” (that is, founded on reasoning that contains no illegitimate steps) 
or “seemly” (that is, not overconfident). This sort of reading makes the argument much 
simpler than Hume’s text suggests, removing any reference to specific or varying prob -
abilities, and treating the issue at each level as simply binary (that is, either OK/seemly, 
or not). But technically this approach may give the best chance of making sense of the 
iterative reduction that Hume claims, because it focuses on a single positive  judgment at 
each level, making it relatively plausible that weakening at any point in the hierarchy 
would iterate downwards. Even if it can thus evade the problems discussed in section 
5 above, however, it still fails to the more fundamental objections in section 6.
47  This tempting speculation is strikingly corroborated by Thomas Reid’s discussion 
of Hume’s Regress Argument, which ultimately leads along this same path, making 
points against antecedent scepticism that are very similar to Hume’s in the Enquiry : 
“If the Sceptic can seriously doubt of the truth and fidelity of his faculty of judging 
when properly used, and suspend his judgment upon that point till he finds proof, his 
scepticism admits of no cure by reasoning . . . until he have new faculties given him, Hume Studies204 Peter Millican
which shall have authority to sit in judgment upon the old. . . . The Sceptic has here 
got possession of a strong hold which is impregnable to reasoning, and we must leave 
him in possession of it, till Nature, by other means, makes him give it up . . . no rea -
soning can prove the truth and fidelity of our faculties. . . . For it is evident, that every 
argument offered to prove the truth and fidelity of our faculties, takes for granted the 
thing in question” ( Essays , VII.iv, 571).
48  Hume’s description of “antecedent” scepticism might seem to imply that he takes 
such scepticism to be  by definition  entirely a priori, in which case it would not encompass 
the argument of Treatise  1.4.1, since that starts from the empirical observation that “our 
fallible and uncertain faculties are very apt to . . . fall into error” (T 1.4.1.1; SBN 180). 
Such an interpretation, however, seems inconsistent with Hume’s taking “Cartesian 
doubt” as a paradigm, given that Descartes’s own sceptical arguments start from his 
empirical awareness of “the large number of falsehoods that I had accepted as true,” his 
finding that “the senses deceive,” and his appeal to the possibility of dreaming which is 
also empirically based ( First Meditation,  12–3). Passmore, in Hume’s Intentions,  appears 
to favour the a priori interpretation, while acknowledging that “the ‘scepticism with 
regard to reason’ which Hume presents in the Treatise  . . . is there commingled, as it is 
in Descartes, with what Hume calls ‘consequent scepticism’—the scepticism which 
arises out of our discovery that our faculties not only might, but do in fact, lead us into 
error” (134).
49  Meeker, Hume’s Radical Scepticism , 91–96) argues that this “more moderate” scepti -
cism of EHU 12.4 (SBN 150) could be just as radical as that of the Treatise , highlighting 
the stated requirements to begin with self-evident principles and to examine  all the 
consequences  of our conclusions (though Meeker acknowledges that these are hyper -
bolic and not to be taken literally). But his main point—that reviewing and examining 
consequences would naturally lead back to the Regress Argument—clearly fails if Hume 
had by then seen the fatal flaws in that argument. Hence, Meeker’s reasoning would 
tend to confirm that Hume had indeed seen these flaws, given that the Enquiry  describes 
this scepticism as “more moderate,” and does not follow through to draw such extreme 
consequences.
50  Note that disciplined causal reasoning using general rules such as those of T 1.3.15 
counts as one of the “general and more establish’d properties of the imagination,” to be 
ascribed to “our judgment” or understanding rather than to the imagination or fancy 
(T 1.3.13.1 1; SBN 149). If my argument of section 6 above is correct, then such reasoning 
would have given Hume ample means for avoiding his dangerous dilemma without 
relying on “trivial suggestions of the fancy.” That he did not see this way out—or, if he 
did see it, did not pursue it—somewhat corroborates Loeb’s suggestion, alluded to in 
note 36 above, that Hume in the Treatise  “is predisposed to secure a destructive result 
. . . part of Hume wants to undo what he constructs, at least in its application to the 
reflective person” ( Stability and Justification , 16). Hume’s calm defence of mitigated 
scepticism in the first Enquiry , however, presents a very different outlook.
51  Discussions that are especially relevant to the current paper are those by Morris, 
“Hume’s Conclusion”; Loeb, Stability and Justification , 215–29; Meeker, Hume’s Radical 
Scepticism , 70–81; and Ainslie, Hume’s True Scepticism , chap. 7; some others are men -
tioned in note 36 above. Meeker puts particular emphasis on the strong influence of 
Treatise  1.4.1, and the extent to which Hume’s position implies “epistemic egalitarian -Volume 44, Number 2, 2018205 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
ism” (that “all beliefs are equal, epistemically speaking,” 17). The first four chapters of 
his book build a strong case for Hume’s being an epistemic egalitarian in Book 1 of the 
Treatise , based mainly on the Regress Argument.
52  It would be unreasonable to expect the Enquiry  to include an explicit retraction 
of the Regress Argument. Hume very rarely discussed changes in his views, and by 
his own account (in the 1775 Advertisement to the second volume of his Essays and 
Treatises on Several Subjects ), the Treatise  was a “juvenile work, which the Author never 
acknowledged”; hence reference back to it from the Enquiry  would be even less likely.
53  I was struck by the dominance of this orthodoxy when compiling the section on 
scepticism in my “Critical Survey of the Literature on Hume and the First Enquiry ” in 
2000 (“Millican, Reading Hume , 461–72). At that time, nearly all of the discussions of 
Hume’s scepticism that I was able to find focused on the Treatise  rather than the Enquiry , 
and few even considered the differences between them. Those most sympathetic to such 
a difference were by Noxon, Immerwahr, and Penelhum, “Hume’s Skepticism,” but the 
most explicit comparative discussion included in the survey, McCormick, “A Change 
in Manner,” argues that “there is no substantial difference” between the scepticism of 
the Treatise  and of the Enquiry  (433), for brief summaries see Millican, Reading Hume , 
422–3, 469).
54  My own perspective on these matters is outlined in Millican, “Hume’s Chief 
Argument,” which attempts to sketch a coherent narrative of Hume’s philosophical 
development, starting from a strong interest in causation associated with various 
topics of religious relevance (notably the Causal Maxim, materialism, and free will). 
Lockean conceptual empiricism provided Hume with an attractive way of addressing 
these topics, ultimately leading to his “chief argument” (so described in the subtitle of 
his Abstract  of 1740), which then largely structures his first Enquiry  of 1748. From this 
perspective, the extreme scepticism of Treatise  1.4 is something of a distraction from 
Hume’s main purposes, where he is led off course by conceptual complications and 
ingenious arguments—most notably the one discussed in the current paper—which he 
later sees to be far less persuasive. A more detailed account of Hume’s “epistemological 
evolution” between the Treatise  and Enquiry  is provided by Qu’s recent book (2020), 
which considers both the scholarly and philosophical issues in considerable depth, 
and draws illuminating comparisons with contemporary epistemology (tending to 
confirm the strength of the Enquiry ’s approach). Qu’s account and my own are very 
much in the same spirit, though he takes Treatise  1.4.7 to be more philosophically 
coherent than I do, while I see Hume’s development as driven especially by the recog -
nition that Treatise  1.4.1 is fatally flawed (and a consequent realisation that extreme 
“antecedent scepticism” is hopeless). But Qu’s book nicely illustrates how systematic 
comparison between Hume’s two rich and complex works can shed valuable light on 
both of them, as well as opening new lines of study regarding Hume’s development. 
There is huge scope here for both philosophical and historical investigation, and fertile 
ground—hitherto largely neglected—for future scholars to explore.Hume Studies206 Peter Millican
WORKS CITED
Primary Works
Arnauld, Antoine, and Pierre Nicole. Logic or the Art of Thinking  [The Port-Royal Logic, 1662]. 
Translated by Jill Vance Buroker. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996.
Bernoulli, Jacob. Ars Conjectandi, Opus Posthumum . Basel: Thurneysen Brothers, 1713.
Descartes, René. Meditations on First Philosophy [1641]. Translated by John Cottingham. 
In The Philosophical Writings of Descartes , vol. 2. Translated and edited by John 
Cottingham, Robert Stoothoff, and Dugald Murphy, 3–62. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1984.
Hume, David. A Treatise of Human Nature: A Critical Edition , vol. 1 [1739/40]. Edited by 
David Fate Norton and Mary J. Norton. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2007.
Hume, David. An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding  [1748]. Edited by Peter Mil -
lican. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007.
Hume, David. The Letters of David Hume , 2 vols. Edited by J. Y . T. Greig. Oxford: Clar -
endon Press, 1932.
Hutcheson, Francis. Synopsis of Metaphysics [1744]. In Logic, Metaphysics, and the Natural 
Sociability of Mankind . Translated by Michael Silverthorne, 57–187. Indianapolis: 
Liberty Fund, 2006.
Locke, John. An Essay Concerning Human Understanding [1690]. Edited by P . H. Nidditch. 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975. (References indicated by “ Essay ” and given by book, 
chapter and section number).
Reid, Thomas. Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man [1785]. Edited by Derek R. Brookes 
and Knud Haakonssen. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 2002.
Sextus Empiricus. Outlines of Scepticism [c. 200]. Translated and edited by Julia Annas 
and Jonathan Barnes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2000.
Secondary Works
Ahmed, Arif. “Hume and the Independent Witnesses,” Mind  124 (2015): 1013–44.
https://doi.org/10.1093/mind/fzv076
Ainslie, Donald C. Hume’s True Scepticism . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2015.
Allison, Henry E. Custom and Reason in Hume . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2008.
Atkinson, David and Jeanne Peijnenburg. “Till at last there remain nothing: Hume’s 
Treatise  1.4.1 in Contemporary Perspective,” Synthese , 2018.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s1 1229-018-1883-8
Babbage, Charles. Ninth Bridgewater Treatise , 2nd ed. London: John Murray, 1838.
Baier, Annette. A Progress of Sentiments . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1991.
Bennett, Jonathan. Learning from Six Philosophers , vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2001.
Broackes, Justin. “Hume, Belief, and Personal Identity.” In Reading Hume on Human 
Understanding . Edited by Peter Millican, 187–210. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002.
Capaldi, Nicholas. David Hume: The Newtonian Philosopher . Boston: Twayne Publish -
ers, 1975.Volume 44, Number 2, 2018207 Hume’s Pivotal Argument, and His Supposed Obligation of Reason
Dauer, Francis. “Hume’s Scepticism with Regard to Reason: A Reconsideration,” Hume 
Studies  22 (1996): 21 1–30.
DeWitt, Richard. “Hume’s Probability Argument of I iv 1,” Hume Studies  1 1 (1985): 
125–40. https://doi.org/10.1353/hms.201 1.0582
Durland, Karánn. “Extreme Skepticism and Commitment in the Treatise ,” Hume Studies  
37 (201 1): 65–98. https://doi.org/10.1353/hms.201 1.0650
Earman, John. Hume’s Abject Failure: The Argument Against Miracles . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2000.
Flew, Antony. David Hume: Philosopher of Moral Science . Oxford: Blackwell, 1986.
Fogelin, Robert. Hume’s Skepticism in the Treatise of Human Nature . London: Routledge 
and Kegan Paul, 1985.
Garfield, Jay L. The Concealed Influence of Custom: Hume’s Treatise from the Inside Out . 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2019.
Garrett, Don. Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy . New York: Oxford Uni -
versity Press, 1997.
Garrett, Don. “Hume’s Conclusions in ‘Conclusion of this Book.’” In The Blackwell 
Guide to Hume’s Treatise . Edited by Saul Traiger, 151–75. Oxford: Blackwell, 2006.
Garrett, Don. Hume . New York: Routledge, 2015.
Immerwahr, John. “A Skeptic’s Progress: Hume’s Preference for the First Enquiry. ” In 
McGill Hume Studies . Edited by David Fate Norton, Nicholas Capaldi, and Wade L. 
Robison, 227–38. San Diego: Austin Hill Press, 1979.
Kemp Smith, Norman. The Philosophy of David Hume . London: Macmillan, 1941.
Keynes, John Maynard. A Treatise on Probability . London: Macmillan, 1921.
Laird, John. Hume’s Philosophy of Human Nature . London: Methuen, 1932.
Loeb, Louis E. Stability and Justification in Hume’s Treatise . Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2002.
Lolordo, Antonia. “Probability and Skepticism about Reason in Hume’s Treatise ,” British 
Journal for the History of Philosophy  8 (2000): 419–46.
https://doi.org/10.1080/096087800442129
Lynch, Michael P . “Hume and the Limits of Reason,” Hume Studies  22 (1996): 89–104.
https://doi.org/10.1353/hms.201 1.0152
MacNabb, D. G. C. David Hume: His Theory of Knowledge and Morality . London: Hutchin -
son, 1951.
MacNabb, D. G. C. “Hume.” In Encyclopedia of Philosophy . Edited by Paul Edwards, IV: 
74–90. New York: Macmillan, 1967.
Maher, Patrick. “Probability in Hume’s Science of Man,” Hume Studies  7 (1981): 137–53.
https://doi.org/10.1353/hms.201 1.0599
McCormick, Miriam. “A Change in Manner: Hume’s Scepticism in the Treatise  and the 
First Enquiry ,” Canadian Journal of Philosophy  29 (1999): 431–47.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00455091.1999.10717520
Meeker, Kevin. Hume’s Radical Scepticism and the Fate of Naturalized Epistemology . Bas -
ingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan, 2013.
Meeker, Kevin and Ted Poston. “Skeptics without Borders,” American Philosophical 
Quarterly  4 (2010): 223–37. https://doi.org/10.1057/9781 137025555
Millican, Peter, ed. Reading Hume on Human Understanding . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002.Hume Studies208 Peter Millican
Millican, Peter. “Twenty Questions about Hume’s ‘Of Miracles.’” In Philosophy and 
Religion: Royal Institute of Philosophy Supplement 6 8. Edited by Anthony O’Hear, 
151–92. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 201 1.
https://doi.org/10.1017/S13582461 1 1000105
Millican, Peter. “Hume’s ‘Scepticism’ about Induction.” In The Bloomsbury Companion to 
Hume . Edited by Alan Bailey and Dan O’Brien, 57–103. London: Continuum, 2012.
Millican, Peter. “Hume’s Chief Argument.” In The Oxford Handbook of David Hume . Edited 
by Paul Russell, 82–108. New York: Oxford University Press, 2016.
Morris, William Edward. “Hume’s Scepticism about Reason,” Hume Studies  15 (1989): 
39–60. https://doi.org/10.1353/hms.201 1.0478
Morris, William Edward. “Hume’s Conclusion,” Philosophical Studies  99 (2000): 89–1 10.
https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1018783526215
Nelson, Benjamin M. Hume’s “Of Scepticism with regard to Reason,” University of 
Connecticut Doctoral Dissertations , 2017. https://opencommons.uconn.edu/  
dissertations/1458/ .
Norton, David Fate and Mary J. Norton. A Treatise of Human Nature: A Critical Edition , 
vol. 2. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2007.
Noxon, James. Hume’s Philosophical Development . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973.
Owen, David. “Scepticism with Regard to Reason.” In The Cambridge Companion to 
Hume’s Treatise . Edited by Donald C. Ainslie and Annemarie Butler, 101–34. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2015.
Passmore, John. Hume’s Intentions , 3rd ed. London: Duckworth, 1980.
Penelhum, Terence. Hume , London: Macmillan, 1975.
Penelhum, Terence. “Hume’s Skepticism and the Dialogues .” In McGill Hume Studies . 
Edited by David Fate Norton, Nicholas Capaldi, and Wade L. Robison, 253–78. San 
Diego: Austin Hill Press, 1979.
Popkin, Richard H. “David Hume: His Pyrrhonism and His Critique of Pyrrhonism,” 
Philosophical Quarterly  1 (1951): 385–407. https://doi.org/10.2307/221631 1
Prichard, H. A. “History of the Theory of Knowledge: Hume.” In Knowledge and Percep -
tion , 174–99. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1950.
Qu, Hsueh M. Hume’s Epistemological Evolution . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2020.
Schmitt, Frederick F . Hume’s Epistemology in the Treatise: A Veritistic Interpretation . Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2014.
Singer, Ira. “Hume’s Extreme Skepticism in Treatise  I IV 7,” Canadian Journal of Philosophy  
25 (1995): 595–622. https://doi.org/10.1080/00455091.1995.10717428
Stewart, M. A. “Hume’s Intellectual Development, 171 1–52.” In Impressions of Hume . Ed-
ited by Marina Frasca-Spada and P . J. E. Kail, 1 1–58. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2005.
Stove, D. C. Probability and Hume’s Inductive Scepticism . Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1973.
Stroud, Barry. Hume . London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1977.
Von Wright, Georg Henrik. The Logical Problem of Induction , 2nd revised edition. Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1957.
Williamson, Timothy. Knowledge and Its Limits . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Wilson, Fred. “Hume’s Sceptical Argument Against Reason,” Hume Studies  9 (1983): 
90–129. https://doi.org/10.1353/hms.201 1.0551
Wright, John P . Hume’s “A Treatise of Human Nature”: An Introduction . Cambridge: Cam -
bridge University Press, 2009.