Hume’s Decisive Turn Away from Egoism 
Peter Millican, Hertford College, University of Oxford 
 
Abstract 
Hume’s moral theory appears to have started, in his Treatise of Human Nature  (1739-40), from a basis 
in Lockean psychological egoism.  By contrast, his Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals  of 1751 
incorporates a full-scale attack on such egoism, originally placed very prominently in the first part of 
Section 2 (though ultimately moved to Appendix 2).  The Treatise itself displays an awareness that 
egoism is not the whole story, and much of Hume’s later case against it builds on points already 
anticipated there.  But his eventual utter rejection of egoism may have been inspired – and was at least 
cemented – by his discovery of the arguments of Joseph Butler’s Sermons.  Following this change, Hume 
reinterprets the notions of “sympathy” and “humanity”, and is able to abandon the sometimes convoluted 
associationist explanations that he had previously relied on “to resolve [unselfish tendencies] ... by a 
philosophical chymistry, ... into ... self-love” ( EPM App 2.4).  Many otherwise puzzling characteristics 
of Hume’s discussions of morals – both early and late – can be understood more clearly when put into 
this context of Hume’s early commitment to, and later renunciation, of psychological egoism. 
____________________ 
 
1.  The Egoist Foundations of the Treatise 
Treatise Books 2 and 3 present a picture of moral motivation that is primarily egoist and hedonist, thus 
precluding any more noble account of morality.  Here Hume follows in the footsteps of John Locke, 
who wrote that “happiness and that alone … moves desire” (Essay II xxi 41), understanding happiness 
itself in terms of pleasure.  Accordingly, “what has an aptness to produce Pleasure in us, is that we call 
Good, and what is apt to produce Pain in us, we call Evil, for no other reason, but for its aptness to 
produce Pleasure and Pain in us, wherein consists our Happiness  and Misery” (Essay II xxi 42). 
 The hedonism of the Treatise – expressed in terms reminiscent of Locke – is very evident in 
Hume’s theory of what he calls the direct passions.  Explicitly and repeatedly, he equates good with 
pleasure, and evil with pain (e.g. T 2.1.1.4, 2.3.1.1, 2.3.9.1-8), explaining our motivation accordingly: 
“’Tis obvious, that when we have the prospect of pain or pleasure from any object, we feel a consequent 
emotion of aversion or propensity, …  And these emotions extend themselves to the causes and effects of 
that object, as they are pointed out to us by reason and experience.”  ( T 2.3.3.3, emphasis added) 
“’Tis easy to observe, that the passions, both direct and indirect, are founded on pain and pleasure …  
Upon the removal of pain and pleasure there immediately follows a removal of love and hatred, pride and 
humility, desire and aversion, and of most of our reflective or secondary impressions.”  ( T 2.3.9.1) 
Hume’s account here seems to be egoist as well as hedonist, for although “pain or pleasure” could in 
principle refer to somebody else’s  pain or pleasure, it is our own that is commonly thought to have the 
“obvious” and intimate connection with motivation that he is clearly assuming, such that “Upon [their] 2 
 removal ... there immediately follows a removal of ... desire and aversion”.1 
 This claim that the Treatise is fundamentally egoist is, however, controversial, attracting both 
supporters and opponents.2  Those insisting that “Hume is no egoist” ( verbatim) include Michael Gill, 
who appeals to Hume’s belief “that humans possess ‘natural’ virtues, many of which are inherently 
sociable” (2000, p. 90); Don Garrett, who points out that “the operation of sympathy guarantees that 
human beings are concerned for the pleasures and pains of others as well as their own” (2015, p. 114);3 
and David Owens, who says Hume “allows that human beings care for family and friends as well as for 
themselves [ T 3.2.2.5]” (2011, p. 72).  We can quickly address the first two of these points – on natural 
virtues and sympathy – but the third will require more detailed consideration. 
 Hume does indeed recognise “sociable” natural virtues, but his explanation of them fits well 
with egoism, for it is based on reducing concern about society to concern about ourselves: 
“we have no ... extensive concern for society but from sympathy; and consequently ’tis that principle, 
which takes us so far out of ourselves, as to give us the same pleasure or uneasiness in characters which 
are useful or pernicious to society, as if they had a tendency to our own advantage or loss.”  ( T 3.3.1.11) 
The effect of Humean sympathy is to replicate other people’s perceived emotions in our own: when we 
see someone happy or sad, the operation of sympathy makes us feel a similar happiness or sadness.  
Sympathy thus makes us care about other people’s pain or pleasure because these are causes of our own 
pain or pleasure (cf. T 2.3.3.3 above).  But without the underlying assumption of egoism, this mechanism 
could be unnecessary: the prospect of others’ pain or pleasure might motivate us directly, without first 
requiring that they be echoed in our own first-personal feelings through the operation of sympathy.  
Hence Hume’s emphasis on sympathy as a central mechanism of the moral theory of the Treatise, so far 
from telling against the suggestion that this theory is fundamentally egoist, actually tells significantly in 
its favour.4 
 The Treatise does, however, acknowledge a notable anti-egoist exception, in that – as Owens 
observes – we naturally feel benevolence towards those we love, and “anger” towards those we hate: 
                                                      
1 This connection is clearly asserted by Locke: if the “perception of Delight”  that God “has been pleased to join” to 
various of our thoughts and sensations “were wholly separated from all our outward Sensations, and inward Thoughts, 
we should have no reason to prefer one Thought or Action, to another; ...  And so we should neither stir our Bodies, nor 
employ our Minds” ( Essay II vii 3; the following section extends the same point to pain).  Locke was himself following 
Thomas Hobbes, who identified delight with pleasure (Leviathan  I vi 11) and was explicitly egoist: “of all voluntary 
acts, the object is to every man his own good” ( Leviathan  I xv 16). 
2 Other supporters include Rachel Cohon (2008, pp. 31-5), Stephen Darwall (1993, p. 423), and Mikael Karlsson (2006, 
pp. 246-7). 
3 Garrett’s sentence continues “..., and he recognizes other basic instinctual desires and aversions besides the desire for 
pleasure and aversion to pain”.  This important additional point will also be addressed below. 
4 McGilvary (1903, pp. 291-4) and Bricke (1996, pp. 129-35) insist that Humean sympathy can communicate others’ 
desires as well as pleasures or pains, thus potentially giving me a desire for another’s wellbeing which is unmediated by 
my own pleasure and pain.  Some of Hume’s text indeed gives this impression, as when he talks about the sympathetic 
communication of “inclinations and sentiments” or “opinions and affections” ( T 2.1.11.2, 7).  These terms are vague, 
and could potentially cover many things, but in practice, Hume’s explanations almost always seem to be in terms of the 
communication of pleasures and pains, and McGilvary is simply mistaken in claiming that “Hume accounts for pity [as] 
sympathy with another’s pain or with his desire to rid himself of that pain” (p. 291, echoed by Bricke, p. 129).  Rather, 
as Merivale points out (2014, p. 129), Hume’s actual treatment of pity at Treatise 2.2.7.2 talks of “affliction and sorrow” 
being communicated by sympathy, not desire (and likewise the 1757 Dissertation says “compassion is an uneasiness in 
the sufferings  of another”, DOP 3.7, emphasis added). 3 
 “Love is always follow’d by a desire of the happiness of the person belov’d, and an aversion to his misery: 
As hatred produces a desire of the misery and an aversion to the happiness of the person hated.”  
(T 2.2.6.3) 
So marked is this tendency that the passions of love and benevolence naturally blend together , “forming 
a compound” and generating a “uniform impression” ( T 2.2.6.1).  The same is true of hatred and anger.  
Conceptually, however, they remain distinct, and Hume himself clearly recognises that their association 
constitutes a departure from egoism, for he later remarks that resentment against someone who injures 
me “often ... makes me desire his evil and punishment, independent of all considerations of pleasure 
and advantage to myself”  (T 2.3.3.9, emphasis added). 
 It is clear, then, that in respect of benevolence and hatred at least, the Treatise is not consistently  
egoist, and the question is whether this exception is sufficient to undermine my claim that it is 
fundamentally  egoist.  Potentially crucial contextual evidence here is given by the paragraph 
immediately preceding the quotation above: 
 “... I begin to be sensible ... of a misfortune, that has attended every system of philosophy, with which 
the world has been yet acquainted.  ’Tis commonly found, that in accounting for the operations of nature 
by any particular hypothesis; ... there is always some phaenomenon, which is more stubborn, ...  the 
difficulty, which I have at present in my eye, is no-wise contrary to my system; but only departs a little 
from that simplicity, which has been hitherto its principal force and beauty.”  ( T 2.2.6.2) 
The rest of the section is devoted to arguing a theoretical point, that our tendency towards benevolence 
and anger, proportioned to our love and hatred rather than to any egoistic calculation, must be generated 
“by the original constitution of the mind” ( T 2.2.6.6).  It cannot apparently be accounted for by 
sympathy,5 and “abstractedly consider’d”, there is no necessity to our minds’ working in this way.  It is 
therefore just a brute fact of human nature; one that Hume apparently sees as being inconveniently out 
of line with his general theory. 
 The remarkable passage at T 2.2.6.2 is surprisingly little discussed in the literature, and its 
significance is debatable.6  Read most naturally, however, Hume is expressing disappointment at the 
complication of his theory from having to add “original” and “unaccountable” principles connecting 
love with benevolence and hatred with anger ( T 2.2.6.6, 2.3.9.8).  One plausible explanation for such 
disappointment would be that he has hitherto been attempting to build his account on an egoist basis, 
a suggestion circumstantially supported by the striking fact that the inconsistency between egoism and 
benevolence provides the focus of the only other topic-specific references to theoretical simplicity in 
Hume’s entire philosophical corpus  (at EPM App 2.6-7, 12).7  If this suggestion is correct, then the 
                                                      
5 Given the reluctance with which Hume acknowledges this complication in his theory, his failure even to consider 
whether it might be explicable through the sympathetic communication of others’ desires counts significantly against 
McGilvary and Bricke’s thesis that Humean sympathy can operate in that way (cf. note 4 above), especially since 
sympathy is immediately invoked in the following section to explain pity and malice in cases where there is no 
“friendship or enmity to occasion this concern or joy” ( T 2.2.7.1-2). 
6 Kail (2007, p. 141) sees the difficulty as being that “two impressions can merge to produce another”.  But Hume 
expresses his worry as arising after he has explained blending, when he turns to examine “those ingredients, which are 
capable of uniting with love and hatred”.  Moreover so far from being an unfortunate complication, the blending of 
emotions turns out to be an important unifying feature of his theory which explains hope and fear on a close analogy 
with his theory of probability ( T 2.3.9.9 17; P 1.7).  Passmore (1980, p. 127) suggests instead that Hume’s anxiety 
concerns his desire “to show … a precise parallel between love and pride, between hate and humility”, but there is no 
obvious textual evidence to back this up. 
7 In the following section, the relevant passages are quoted from EPM 2.6 and 2.12 in the original 1751 edition. 4 
 incompatibility of his account of benevolence with pure egoism serves to confirm, rather than 
undermine, the straightforward view that the theory of the Treatise starts from an egoist basis. 
 Having recognised benevolence and anger as exceptions to his general theory, Hume seems to 
have edited his account of the direct passions to reflect this, though apparently rather clumsily: 
“Beside good and evil, or in other words, pain and pleasure, the direct passions frequently arise from a 
natural impulse or instinct, which is perfectly unaccountable.  Of this kind is the desire of punishment to 
our enemies, and of happiness to our friends; hunger, lust, and a few other bodily appetites.  These 
passions, properly speaking, produce good and evil, and proceed not from them, like the other affections.”  
(T 2.3.9.8) 
This passage starts with a bald assertion of hedonism – that “good” and “evil” are to be identified with 
“pleasure” and “pain” respectively – but then goes on to observe that we sometimes desire other things 
owing to an “unaccountable” natural instinct (presumably alluding here to the discussion at T 2.2.6 that 
we have just examined).  These instinctive desires can “produce good and evil” (i.e. pleasure and pain), 
presumably through the satisfaction or frustration that we experience when they are fulfilled or fail.  But 
such an account is strained: an expectation of pleasure and pain is not essential to these desires (e.g. we 
can strive towards a future goal – such as the eventual defeat of an invading enemy – whose fulfilment 
we do not expect to see), and indeed if such an expectation were essential, then they would not be 
“perfectly unaccountable”.  So recognising these “unaccountable” desires is in serious tension with the 
crude hedonism of treating “pleasure” and “pain” as “other words” for good and evil. 
 The passage just quoted acknowledges that we have a natural instinct not only to desire 
“punishment to our enemies” and “happiness to our friends”, but also “hunger, lust, and a few other 
bodily appetites”.  It is tempting to speculate that Hume’s acknowledgement of these further instincts 
was prompted by his work on Section 2.2.11 of the Treatise, “Of the amorous passion, or love betwixt 
the sexes”, which recognises the phenomenon of bodily appetite, and describes hunger as a “primary 
inclination of the soul” ( T 2.2.11.3).  The absence of parental affection from the list may seem surprising, 
given Hume’s statement in the immediately following section that “The affection of parents to their 
young proceeds from a peculiar instinct in animals, as well as in our species” ( T 2.2.12.5).8  But the 
isolation of this statement – as a paragraph in itself – rather suggests that it was a last-minute insertion.  
Hume’s initial explanation of such affection at T 2.2.4.2 had subsumed it under his general account “of 
the love of relations” in terms of sympathy, so there is clear evidence of development in his view here.9  
When he later describes the “calm passions” that result from original instincts, he lists “the love of life, 
and kindness to children” alongside “benevolence and resentment” ( T 2.3.3.8).10  But nowhere in the 
Treatise do we find Hume systematically bringing together these various lists (presumably a symptom 
of the hasty publication that he later regretted).  We must look to the second Enquiry for the most 
comprehensive catalogue, citing “hunger, thirst, and other appetites, resentment, love of life, attachment 
to offspring, and other passions” as all arising “from a simple original instinct in the human breast, 
                                                      
8 This section “Of the love and hatred of animals” also notes that animals – like humans – feel affection or enmity 
according to how they are treated ( T 2.2.12.3).  The analogy between animals and humans is a strong theme in Hume’s 
thought, both in the Treatise and the two Enquiries  (cf. also T 1.3.16, 2.1.12, 2.3.9.32, EHU 9, EPM App 2.8-9, 13). 
9 The change was permanent, as shown by Essays 162-3 (“The Sceptic”, para. 10), EPM 3.40, and DOP 3.3 n. 4. 
10 He also mentions a different form of calm passion, “the general appetite to good, and aversion to evil, consider’d 
merely as such”, though this leaves inexplicit what understanding of “good” and “evil” he has in mind here. 5 
 which nature has implanted for like salutary purposes” ( EPM 3.40).  But by then, as we shall see, Hume 
had completely abandoned the initial egoism of the Treatise. 
2.  Rejecting Moral Scepticism and Egoism 
Although Hume himself displays no such subversive intention, it is not surprising that the fundamentally 
secular and egoist theory of the Treatise was viewed by his critics as being seriously dangerous to 
morality.  The hostile 1745 pamphlet that provoked his Letter from a Gentleman to His Friend in 
Edinburgh  charged him “With sapping the Foundations of Morality, by denying the natural and essential 
Difference betwixt Right and Wrong, Good and Evil, Justice and Injustice; making the Difference only 
artificial, and to arise from human Conventions and Compacts” ( LFG 19).11  Prominent amongst the 
passages cited to press this charge are one attributing the origin of justice to “ the Selfishness and 
confined Generosity of Men ” (LFG 10, cf. T 3.2.2.18) and another affirming “that there is no such 
Passion in human Minds, as the Love of Mankind  merely as such, independent of personal Qualities, of 
Service or of Relation to ourself” ( LFG 10, cf. T 3.2.1.12).  Both have an obvious basis in the egoism of 
the Treatise and the limited boundaries of Humean sympathy.12 
 In stark contrast with the Treatise, the second Enquiry of 1751 highlights from the start Hume’s 
determination to repudiate any accusation of moral scepticism or egoism.  In the first two paragraphs of 
Section 1, he insists that “Those who have refused the Reality of moral Distinctions … really do not 
believe at all the Opinion they defend” (1751, 1.1-2).  Then Section 2 starts by outlining two types of 
egoist view, one (commonly associated with Mandeville) that cynically dismisses all would-be moral 
concern as hypocrisy, and the other – less extreme – “much insisted on by Philosophers, … that whatever 
Affection one may feel, or imagine he feels for others, no Passion is, or can be disinterested; that the 
most generous Friendship, however sincere, is a Modification of Self-love; and, that even unknown to 
Ourselves, we seek only our Gratification, while we appear the most deeply engag’d in Schemes for the 
Liberty and Happiness of Mankind” (1751, 2.2).13  Hume includes Epicurus, Hobbes, and Locke 
amongst those professing this “selfish System of Morals” (1751, 2.3), and goes on to explain how such 
a theory need not imply a denial of “the Reality of moral Distinctions” (which he has already dismissed 
as incredible): 
“AN Epicurean  or a Hobbist readily allows, that there is such a Thing as Friendship in the World, ... tho’ 
he may attempt, by a philosophical Chymistry, to resolve the Elements of this Passion ... into those of 
                                                      
11 This may partly explain why the artificiality of justice – so prominent in the Treatise – is mentioned as such just once 
in the second Enquiry, and merely in a footnote to an appendix ( EPM App  3.9 n. 64).  But Hume also has a significant 
principled reason to downplay the distinction between natural and artificial virtues in his later moral theory, because 
there they become answerable to the same general criteria through his definition of virtue in terms of usefulness and 
agreeableness ( M 9.1, 12), and its function in correcting  erroneous moral judgements such as regarding the “monkish 
virtues” ( M 9.3).  This is another significant and systematic change in Hume’s moral theory, consequent on his crucial 
transition away from egoism and towards acknowledgement of a broad “humanity” (cf. §3 below). 
12 The second Treatise passage continues “’Tis true, there is no human, and indeed no sensible, creature, whose happiness 
or misery does not, in some measure, affect us, when brought near to us, and represented in lively colours: But this 
proceeds merely from sympathy, and is no proof of such an universal affection to mankind, …” ( T 3.2.1.12). 
13 This and the following quotations are taken from the 1751 first edition of the second Enquiry, where the discussion of 
egoism occupies Part 1 of Section 2.  For the 1777 posthumous edition, Hume moved this discussion into Appendix 2, 
which is where the final versions of these passages are now to be found.  The text is largely unchanged (apart from 
capitalisation), and the paragraph numbers correspond exactly. 6 
 another, and explain every Affection to be Self-love, twisted and moulded into a Variety of ... 
Appearances.  But ... even according to the selfish System, …  I esteem the Man, whose Self-love ... is 
so directed as to give him a Concern for others, and render him serviceable to Society: As I hate or despise 
him, who has no Regard to any Thing beyond his own pitiful Gratifications and Enjoyments.  In vain 
would you suggest, that these Characters … are, at the Bottom, the same”  (1751, 2.4) 
Having thus observed that the status of the selfish hypothesis is “not so material, as is usually imagin’d, 
to Morality and Practice” (1751, 2.5),14 Hume goes on nevertheless to advance a battery of objections 
to it, some of which we have seen anticipated in the Treatise. 
 The most obvious objection to the egoist theory is its mismatch with common experience of 
human affections, many of which seem plainly unselfish, and have only been supposed otherwise “from 
that Love of Simplicity , which has been the Source of much false Reasoning in Philosophy” (1751, 2.6, 
cf. §5 above).15  Other strong considerations come from the analogy with animals, both their naïve 
kindness which cannot plausibly be attributed to “refin’d Deductions of Self-interest” (2.8), and the 
manifest “Tenderness to their Offspring” observed “in all sensible Beings” (2.9), our experience of 
which is again manifestly contrary to the selfish theory: 
“What Interest can a fond Mother have in View, who loses her Health by assiduous Attendance on her 
sick Child, and afterwards languishes, and dies for Grief, when freed, by its Death, from the Slavery of 
that Attendance?”  (1751, 2.9) 
Moving on to a more fundamental objection, Hume observes that certain “bodily Wants or Appetites”, 
and also “mental passions” such as the desire for fame, power, or vengeance, are directed immediately 
toward specific objects, rather than involving a merely indirect desire motivated by a quest for pleasure.  
In such cases, the directed desire precedes – and its satisfaction explains – the pleasure, rather than the 
anticipated pleasure generating the desire.  Thus egoism puts the cart before the horse: 
“Nature must, by the internal Frame and Constitution of the Mind, give an original Propensity to Fame, 
’ere we can reap any Pleasure from it, or pursue it from ... Self-love, and a Desire of Happiness.  If I have 
no Vanity, I take no Delight in Praise:  If I be void of Ambition, Power gives no Enjoyment:  If I be not 
angry, the Punishment of an Adversary is totally indifferent to me.”  (1751, 2.12) 
Once this key point has been accepted – that we can, and do, directly desire some things for themselves, 
rather than merely as means to pleasure – it becomes clear that there is no “Difficulty of conceiving, 
that this may likewise be the Case with Benevolence and Friendship, and that, from the original Frame 
of our Temper, we may feel a Desire of another’s Happiness or Good” (1751, 2.13).16  Having broken 
the spell of the egoist assumption that we can only be motivated by our own pleasure and pain, we are 
free to open our eyes to the obvious empirical evidence that we do in fact desire the good of others (most 
obviously family and friends), and not merely for selfish reasons.  Indeed from this perspective it 
becomes clear that “if we consider rightly of the Matter, ... the Hypothesis, which allows of a 
disinterested Benevolence, distinct from Self-love, has really more Simplicity  in it, and is more 
conformable to the Analogy of Nature, than that which pretends to resolve all Friendship and Humanity 
                                                      
14 An observation perhaps partly intended to acquit the Treatise of “sapping the Foundations of Morality”. 
15 Again, contrast this sceptical observation with the lament for lost simplicity at T 2.2.6.2, quoted in §5. 
16 Or indeed another’s harm, in the case of “Vengeance, [which] may be so eagerly pursued, as to make us knowingly 
neglect every Consideration of Ease, Interest or Safety” (1751, 2.13).  Note that this discussion – focused on attacking 
egoism – has culminated in the same conceptual nexus as T 2.2.6.3, again somewhat confirming that Hume’s theoretical 
anxiety at T 2.2.6.2 is itself associated with egoism. 7 
 into this latter Principle” (1751, 2.12).  Even theoretical simplicity ultimately fails to tell in favour of 
the selfish theory, which has by now been comprehensively refuted. 
 Although most of these objections can be seen as developing from points first made in the 
Treatise, it seems that Hume’s decisive turn away from egoism had a distinct and specific inspiration 
which is identified in the first Enquiry (rather than the second).  A footnote appended to EHU 1.14 in 
the 1748 and 1750 editions clearly acknowledges the “cart before the horse” point above: 
“It has been prov’d, beyond all Controversy, that even the Passions, commonly esteem’d selfish, carry 
the Mind beyond Self, directly to the Object; that tho’ the Satisfaction of these Passions gives us 
Enjoyment, yet the Prospect of this Enjoyment is not the Cause of the Passion, but on the contrary the 
Passion is antecedent to the Enjoyment”  (1748, 1.14 n.) 
In the previous sentence there is a further note “See Butler’s Sermons”, thus crediting Joseph Butler 
with this point, and indeed the argument of his Sermon XI “Upon the Love of our Neighbour” has long 
been considered the classic refutation of naïve egoism.  Here we have strong evidence that it was reading 
Butler which ultimately persuaded Hume that egoism was not only wrong in detail but fundamentally 
misguided.  If so, that reading had presumably occurred by the time he wrote the essay “Of the Dignity 
or Meanness of Human Nature”, published in 1741, which makes the same key point.17  And it is even 
possible that a preliminary reading of the sermons prior to 1739 – perhaps stimulated by Hume’s high 
opinion of Butler’s 1736 Analogy of Religion  – lay behind the clumsily edited paragraph at T 2.3.9.8 
which talks of natural passions that “properly speaking, produce good and evil, and proceed not from 
them, like the other affections”.18 
 However this might be, it seems clear that once Hume had fully absorbed Butler’s point, he not 
only accepted it but reinforced it with further arguments, turning completely against the initial egoism 
of the Treatise and thus switching sides on one of the most central debates in moral philosophy.  Having 
declared his position on the matter clearly and prominently, at the beginning of Section 2 of his 1751 
moral Enquiry (now Appendix 2), he removed from the first Enquiry the footnote that provides such a 
useful clue regarding a key source of this fundamental change of mind. 
3.  From Sympathy to Humanity 
Hume’s abandonment of egoism, not surprisingly, leaves significant traces in his treatment of sympathy 
and humanity, terms that are initially quite distinct but which he ultimately blurs.  In the Treatise, 
sympathy is an association-based mechanism whereby the “inclinations and sentiments” of others are 
communicated to us ( T 2.1.11.2).  Its explanatory basis is that our lively ideas of others’ “passions and 
                                                      
17 “The virtuous sentiment or passion produces the pleasure, and does not arise from it.  I feel a pleasure in doing good 
to my friend, because I love him; but do not love him for the sake of that pleasure.”  ( Essays 85-6). 
18 This speculation, from Merivale (2014, §2.1), is chronologically plausible.  But it is unclear whether Hume’s wording 
genuinely manifests a grasp of Butler’s “cart before the horse” point (as the 1741 quotation in footnote 17 above 
somewhat corroborates), or is instead a relatively ad hoc attempt to force the recalcitrant phenomena of benevolence, 
resentment and bodily appetites (whose independent recognition in the Treatise we have traced in §5 above) into the 
theoretical framework of direct passions that are supposedly “founded on pain and pleasure” ( T 2.3.9.1).  Merivale’s 
speculation also requires that Hume could have become dimly aware of Butler’s point without grasping it sufficiently to 
appreciate its potentially devastating impact on the more fundamental egoism of the Treatise. 8 
 sentiments” are close to impressions, and they can be enhanced through association so that “the ideas of 
the affections of others are converted into the very impressions they represent” ( T 2.1.11.7-8; cf. also 
2.1.11.14-18, 2.2.4.6-7, 2.3.6.8).  This mechanism of sympathy plays a huge role in Books 2 and 3 of 
the Treatise – being mentioned in no fewer than 85 paragraphs – and amongst many other functions it 
explains our “natural humanity” or general concern for “the happiness of [our] fellow-creatures” 
(T 3.3.1.12).  Any such humanity is imperfect and partial, for as the author of the hostile 1745 pamphlet 
pointed out (see §6 above), Hume insists at T 3.2.1.12 “that there is no such passion in human minds, as 
the love of mankind, merely as such, independent of personal qualities, of services, or of relation to 
ourself”.  And our imperfect humanity, such as it is, plays no very significant role in the Treatise, being 
mentioned in only 7 paragraphs, apparently just one virtue amongst others ( T 3.3.1.24, 3.3.3.3-4) and 
doubly unreliable as a moral criterion since it is “often … contrary to the laws of justice” ( T 3.3.1.12). 
 In the second Enquiry, by contrast, “sympathy” is mentioned in only 22 paragraphs, and the 
term seems generally to be used in a more everyday sense – for a sentiment of fellow-feeling rather than 
a mechanism – and independently of the specific theory of the Treatise.  Only the following passage 
comes close to speaking of the literal vivacity transfer which characterised that theory:19 
“Bring … virtue nearer, by our acquaintance or connexion with the persons, or even by an eloquent recital 
of the case; our hearts are immediately caught, our sympathy enlivened, and our cool approbation 
converted into the warmest sentiments of friendship and regard.”  ( EPM 5.43) 
Soon after, and elsewhere, “sympathy” seems to be closely linked and even virtually equated with 
“humanity”, involving “not … any regards to self-interest, but … a tendency to public good” ( EPM 5.45, 
cf. 9.12).  Sometimes, indeed, they seem to be identified as a single sentiment (1751, 2.5 n.; EPM 6.3).  
Moreover “humanity” now becomes the dominant term, mentioned in no fewer than 48 paragraphs of 
the second Enquiry.20  This stylometric change might be thought merely presentational, given Hume’s 
continuing emphasis in the central Section 5 (entitled “Why Utility Pleases”) on feelings of a broadly 
sympathetic nature.  But there are at least three reasons to suggest that it runs much deeper, reflecting 
his theoretical turn against egoism.  First, where the Treatise had denied any “ Love of Mankind  merely 
as such”, Hume now speaks of “a generous concern for our kind and species” ( EPM 2.5), “a warm 
concern for the interests of our species”, “a general approbation of what is useful to society”, and “our 
natural philanthropy” ( EPM 5.39-40).  Secondly, in the Conclusion of the Enquiry (EPM 9.6-9, cf. also 
6.5), this broad humanity is eulogised as the basis of moral sentiments and judgements, being “the same 
principle” in “all mankind” and giving rise to “universal sentiments of censure or approbation”.21  It is 
                                                      
19 At EPM 7.2 and 7.21, Hume speaks of sympathy as a “contagion”, which is suggestive of communication of emotion 
from one person to another, but silent regarding the mechanism.  There are likewise various other passages that are 
reminiscent of Hume’s theory of sympathy from the Treatise, but none so specific as to warrant any strong interpretative 
conclusions regarding how much of that theory he retained. 
20 Thus while paragraphs referring to “sympathy” decline by a factor of nearly 4 times from Treatise Books 2 and 3 to 
the second Enquiry, those referring to “humanity” multiply by a factor of very nearly 7 times.  The Dissertation on the 
Passions, incidentally, includes only three paragraphs referring to “sympathy” (none to “humanity”), with at best vague 
hints of the theory of the Treatise at DOP 3.4 and 3.11. 
21 In the Treatise, Hume attempts to provide a mechanism for standardisation of moral sentiments – and thus reliable 
moral judgement – based on sympathy with the agent’s “narrow circle” of acquaintance ( T 3.3.3.2, cf. 3.3.1.30).  This 
may be the best he can do within a predominantly egoist theory, but as Jackie Taylor points out (2002, pp. 52-6; 2015, 
pp. 113-6), it is morally inadequate, since such a narrow circle will commonly display partiality and prejudice.  Hume 
himself clearly recognises this risk in the 1757 essay “Of the Standard of Taste” (paras 1, 11; Essays 226-7, 233). 9 
 these universal sentiments on which our language is “moulded” ( EPM 9.8), thus establishing the 
linguistically agreed standard of moral thought and communication from which the Enquiry’s 
investigation began (at EPM 1.10).  Thirdly, Hume explicitly contradicts the theoretical aspirations of 
his earlier account, which as we saw above not only explained (limited) humanity as arising from 
sympathy, but also attempted to explain sympathy itself, whereas now Hume dismisses such attempts 
as unnecessary and probably futile: 
“It is needless to push our researches so far as to ask, why we have humanity or a fellow-feeling with 
others.  …  We must stop somewhere in our examination of causes; ...  No man is absolutely indifferent 
to the happiness and misery of others.  The first has a natural tendency to give pleasure; the second, pain.  
…  It is not probable, that these principles can be resolved into principles more simple and universal, 
whatever attempts may have been made to that purpose .”  (EPM 5.17 n. 19, emphasis added) 
So an associationist explanation that had been postulated in the Treatise is disowned in the second 
Enquiry, not just implicitly by omission, but through explicit denial.  Presumably this change reflects, 
at least in part, Hume’s awareness that sympathy – as interpreted in the Treatise – is unable to do the 
theoretical job required.22  In the Treatise, starting from an egoist foundation, he had based morality on 
sympathy and argued (very reasonably) that this would be unable to ground any genuinely universal 
humanity.  Now in the Enquiry, he recognises the manifest fact of universal humanity (for example, in 
his own feelings), identifies this as the true basis of moral thought and language, and consistently draws 
the conclusion that the mechanism of sympathy cannot provide the requisite basis for morals. 
____________________ 
 
                                                      
22 See also EPM 6.3, which argues that sympathetic identification cannot explain our approval of qualities useful to 
another person by attempting to reduce this to “ self-love”, and EPM 5.13, which describes as a “weak subterfuge” the 
appeal to imaginative identification with “distant ages and countries”.  If the interpretation above is correct – that such 
reductive explanation was precisely the intended role of sympathy in the Treatise – then these paragraphs may amount 
to an explicit renunciation of that account, replacing it with “a quite different principle, which ... interests us in the 
felicity of the person whom we contemplate” ( EPM 6.3).  Hume ends this paragraph talking of “a pleasing sentiment of 
sympathy and humanity”, but this cannot be sympathy as understood in the Treatise. 10 
 Bibliography 
Works by David Hume 
T (1739-40), A Treatise of Human Nature: A Critical Edition , eds David Fate Norton and Mary J. Norton, 
Oxford University Press, 2007 – references indicated by “T”, and given to book, part, section and 
paragraph number, or “T App” (Appendix) followed by paragraph number 
Essays (1741-83), Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary , ed. Eugene F. Miller, Liberty Classics, 2nd edition 
1987 – references indicated by “Essays” , and given to page number 
LFG (1745), A Letter from a Gentleman to his Friend in Edinburgh , Edinburgh (anonymous, no named printer 
or bookseller); republished in facsimile ed. Ernest C. Mossner and John V. Price, Edinburgh University 
Press, 1967 – references indicated by “LFG”, and given to page number 
EHU (1748), An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding , ed. Peter Millican, Oxford University Press, 2007 
(1777 edition, includes textual variants) – references indicated by “EHU”, and given to section and 
paragraph number 
EPM (1751), An Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals , ed. Tom L. Beauchamp, Oxford University 
Press, 1998 (copytext 1772 edition) – references indicated by “EPM”, and given to section (or appendix, 
e.g. “EPM App 1” etc.) and paragraph number 
DOP (1757), A Dissertation on the Passions  and The Natural History of Religion , ed. Tom L. Beauchamp, 
Oxford University Press, 2007 (copytext 1772 edition) – references to Dissertation  indicated by “DOP”, 
and given to section and paragraph number 
Other Works 
Bricke, John (1996), Mind and Morality: An Examination of Hume’s Moral Psychology , Oxford University Press. 
Butler, Joseph (1736), Fifteen Sermons Preached at the Rolls Chapel , 3rd edition, London. 
Butler, Joseph (1736), The Analogy of Religion, Natural and Revealed, to the Constitution and Course of Nature , 
Dublin. 
Cohon, Rachel (2008), Hume’s Morality: Feeling and Fabrication , Oxford University Press. 
Darwall, Stephen (1993), “Motive and Obligation in Hume’s Ethics”, Noûs 27, pp. 415-48. 
Garrett, Don (1997), Cognition and Commitment in Hume’s Philosophy , New York: Oxford University Press. 
Garrett, Don (2015), Hume, Routledge. 
Gill, Michael (2000), “Hume’s Progressive View of Human Nature”, Hume Studies  26, pp. 87-108. 
Hobbes, Thomas (1651), Leviathan: or, The matter, forme, & power of a common-wealth ecclesiasticall and civill , 
London. 
Kail, P. J. E. (2007), Projection and Realism in Hume’s Philosophy , Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Karlsson, Mikael M. (2006), “Reason, Passion, and the Influencing Motives of the Will”, in Saul Traiger (ed.), 
The Blackwell Guide to Hume’s Treatise , Blackwell, pp. 235-55. 
Locke, John (1690/1700), An Essay Concerning Human Understanding , ed. P. H. Nidditch, Clarendon Press, 1975 
(“Essay”). 
McGilvary, Evander Bradley (1903), “Altruism in Hume’s Treatise”, Philosophical Review  12, pp. 272-98. 
Merivale, Amyas (2014), An Enquiry concerning the Passions: A critical study of Hume’s Four Dissertations , 
University of Leeds PhD thesis. 
Owens, David (2011), “The Problem with Promising”, in Hanoch Sheinman (ed.), Promises and Agreements: 
Philosophical Essays , Oxford University Press, pp. 58-79. 
Passmore, John (1980), Hume’s Intentions , third edition, London: Duckworth. 
Taylor, Jacqueline (2002), “Hume on the Standard of Virtue”, The Journal of Ethics  6, pp. 43-62 