What Hume Really Thought about Causation  
Peter Millican, Hertford College, Oxford  
Cambridge Moral Sciences Club , 19th November  2019  
Introduction  
The key sections  on causation  are entitled “Of the Idea of Necessary Connexion” : Treatise of Human Nature , 
Section 1.3.14 and Enquiry concerning Human Understanding , Section  7 (henceforth “ T 1.3.14” and “ E 7”): 
• Both discussions start from Hume’s empiricist “Copy Principle”  (T 1.3.14.1, E 7.4), that all ideas are copies 
of impressions (or composites of ideas which are th us copie d: T 1.1.1.3 -12, E 2.5-9). 
• Hume  seeks  the impression  from which the  crucial  idea – of causal power  or necessary connexion  – is 
copied , and he ultimately ide ntifies th is as the “customary transition of the imagination from one object to 
its usual attendant” ( E 7.28, cf. T 1.3.14.24) through which we perform inductive inferences  (thus linking  
with his prior discussions of induction , cf. T 1.3.6.3, 12 -15; E 5.3-6).  
• He then encapsulate s this result in his famous two “definitions of cause”  (T 1.3.14.31, E 7.29) .  
The Significance  of Causation in Hume’s Philosophy  
• The longest part of the  entire  Treatise , Book 1 Part 3, is mainly devoted to the understanding of causation 
and causal reasoning, together with the related theories of belief and probability.   
• Hume argues  (T 1.3.2.1 -3) that only causation  can ground an inference from observed to unobserved  (i.e. 
an empirical, “probable” inference) .  And the subtitle of  the Treatise  declares its aim to be  “to introduce 
the experimental [i.e. empirical] method of reasoning into moral subjects”.  
• Not only is causation the principal  theme of Treatise 1.3, but also, the bulk of the discussion is framed  by 
Hume’s de clared inte ntion to analyse the crucial  idea:   
“To BEGIN  regularly, we must consider the idea of  causation , and see from what origin it is deriv’d.   ’Tis 
impossible to reason justly, without understanding perfectly the idea concerning which we reason; and ’tis 
imposs ible perfectly to  understand any idea, without tracing it up to its origin, and examining that primary 
impression, from which it arises. ”  (T 1.3.2.4)  
• This analysis  ultimately bear s fruit at T 1.3.14.20 -4, but on the way , Hume discusses  the Causal Maxim 
(T 1.3.3) ,1 the nature and basis  of causal inference ( T 1.3.4 -6), the definition, causes, and influence of belief  
(T 1.3.7 -10), and varieties of probable judgement, both respectable ( T 1.3.11 -12) and otherwise ( T 1.3.13).  
• Hume rounds off Book 1 Part 3 with a brief but important section giving “Rules by which to judge of causes 
and effects” ( T 1.3.15)  and a discussion of “The reason of animals” ( T 1.3.16), the latter corroborating his 
theory of human causal inference thro ugh its application  to non -human animals.2 
• The discussion s of materialism in T 1.4.5 .29-33 and of “liberty and necessity”  (i.e. free -will and 
determinism)  in T 2.3.1 -2 extend  causal explanation into the realm of human action.   Both of these build 
crucially on Hume’s analysis  of causation (e.g. T 1.3.14.33, 1.4.5.30).3 
• All this leaves it extremely unlikely that Hume would be a “corrosive” sceptic about causation.  
 
1 The Causal Maxim was a core component of the Cosmological Argument for God’s existence as proposed by John Locke and 
Samuel Clarke, and we have biographical evidence that Hume’s early sceptical interest in religion was significantly focused o n 
these philo sophers (see Millican 2016, §II -III).   
2 This also importantly promotes Hume’s biological naturalism, placing humanity squarely amongst the other animals.  
3 Hume also had an early interest in the Problem of Evil, and recognised that determinism would make  God responsible for 
humanly caused evil – see E 8.36, and his “early memoranda” (Millican 2016, §II).  For discussion of the relationship between 
the Causal Maxim, what Hume calls “the doctrine of necessity”, and determinism, see Millican (2010).   2 Key Points of Hume’s Theory of Causation  
1. Whether A causes B is an objective matter  of fact, and causes – whether 
superficial or hidden  – can be discovered by systematic investigation  
• “Since therefore ’tis possible for all objects to become causes or effects to each other, it may be proper to fix 
some general rules, by which we may know when the y really are so .”  (T  1.3.15.2 , my emphasis ) 
• “philosophers, observing, that, almost in every part of nature, there is contained a vast variety of springs and 
principles, which are hid, by reason of their minuteness or remoteness, find, that it is at least possible the 
contrariety of events may not proceed from any contingency in the cause, but from the secret operation of 
contrary causes.  This possibility is converted into certainty by farther observation; when they remark, that, 
upon an exact scrutiny, a contrariety of effects always betrays a contrariety of causes, and proceeds from 
their mutual opposition. ”  (E 8.13, copied from T 1.3.12.5)  
2. Causes are understood to be prior and contiguous to their effects  
• “I find in the first place, that whatever objects  are consider’d as causes or effects, are contiguous; and that 
nothing can operate in a time or place, which is ever so little remov’d from those of its existence. ”  (T 1.3.2.6  
cf. T 1.3.15.3 ), but Hume expresses reservations in a footnote, and drops contiguity from the Enquiry  (7.29 ). 
• “The second relation I shall observe as essential to causes and effects, is ... that of priority of time in the 
cause before the effect. ”  (T 1.3.2.7 , cf. T 1.3.15.4 ) 
3. The principal  component of the concept of causation is necessary connexion , 
which is essential to it  
• “Shall we then rest contented with these two relations of contiguity and succession, as affording a compleat 
idea of causation?  By no means. An obj ect may be contiguous and prior to another, without being consider’d 
as its cause.  There is a NECESSARY CONNEXION  to be taken into consideration; and that relation is of much 
greater importance, than any of the other two above -mention’d .”  (T 1.3.2.11)   
• “we have ... discover’d a new relation betwixt cause and effect, ...  This relation is their CONSTANT 
CONJUNCTION .  Contiguity and succession are not sufficient to make us pronounce any two objects to be 
cause and effect, unless we perceive, that these two relations are preserv’d in several instances.   We may 
now see the advantage of quitting the direct survey of this relation, in order to discover the nature of that 
necessary connexion , which makes so essential a part of it. ”  (T 1.3.6.3)   
• Hume  continues to insist that necessity “makes an essential part” of causation itself ( T 2.3.1.18, cf. E 8.25) 
and of the definitions of cause ( T 2.3.2.4, E 8.27).  
4. Causal necessity is not the same as absolute  or metaphysical  necessity  
• “with regard to propositi ons, that are prov’d by intuition or demonstration  ..., Whatever is absurd is 
unintelligible; nor is it possible for the imagination to conceive any thing contrary to a demonstration.  But 
... in reasonings from causation, and concerning matters of fact, t his absolute necessity cannot take place, 
and the imagination is free to conceive both sides of the question ”  (T 1.3.7.3)   
• “… without consulting experience, …  Any thing may produce any thing.  Creation, annihilation, motion, 
reason, volition; all these m ay arise from one another, or from any other object we can imagine. ”  (T 1.3.15.1 ) 
• “to consider the matter a priori , any thing may produce any thing ”  (T 1.4.5.30, cf. 1.4.5.32)  
• “The mind can always conceive any effect to follow from any cause, and indeed any event to follow upon 
another: whatever we conceive is possible, at least in a metaphysical sense  …”  (A 11, cf. E 12.28 -9)  
5. Hume is a convinced determinist, although his basis for this is unclear  
• Hume descr ibes – and implicitly en dorses – the st andard deterministic view about “the operations of external 
bodies” ( T 2.3.1.3, cf. A 31, E 8.4), and then goes on to argue that exactly the same applies to “the actions of 
the mind”  (T 2.3.1.5 -15, E 8.7-20).  (For detail on this and all the points below, see Millican 2010.)  
• He denies genuine chance  or indifference  (e.g. T 1.3.12.1, 2.3.1.18; E 6.1, 8.25).  
• His fourth “rule by which to judge of causes and effects” at T 1.3.15.6  says “ The same cause always produces 
the same effect, and the same effect never a rises but from the same cause.”   3 • Determinism also features in Hume’s  theological discussions, notably regarding the Problem of Evil (e.g. 
E 8.32 ff.) and the morality of suicide (“Of Suicide” paragraph 5, Essays  580).   
• “I never asserted so absurd a Proposition as that any thing might arise without a Cause: I only maintain’d, 
that our Certainty of the Falshood of that Proposition proceeded nei ther from Intuition nor Demonstration; 
but from another Source. ”  (HL i 186)  
• “the philosopher and physician ... know, that a human body is a mighty complicated machine: That many 
secret powers lurk in it, which are altogether beyond our comprehension: That to us it must often appear very 
uncertain in its operations: And that therefore the irregular events, which ou twardly discover themselves, can 
be no proof, that the laws of nature are not observed with the greatest regularity in its internal operations and 
government.   
 The philosopher, if he be consistent, must apply the same reasoning to the actions and volition s of 
intelligent agents.  The most irregular and unexpected resolutions of men may frequently be accounted for 
by those, who know every particular circumstance of their character and situation.  A person of an obliging 
disposition gives a peevish answer: B ut he has the toothake, or has not dined.  ...  Or even when an action, 
as sometimes happens, cannot be particularly accounted for, either by the person himself or by others; we 
know, in general, that the characters of men are, to a certain degree, inconst ant and irregular.  ...  The internal 
principles and motives may operate in a uniform manner, notwithstanding these seeming irregularities; in 
the same manner as the winds, rain, clouds, and other variations of the weather are supposed to be governed 
by st eady principles; though not easily discoverable by human sagacity and enquiry. ”  (E 8.14-15) 
6. Necessary connexion  is one of a family of “power” terms which Hume treats as 
virtually synonymous in this context  
• “I begin with observing that the terms of efficac y, agency, power, force, energy, necessity, connexion , and 
productive quality , are all nearly synonimous; and therefore ’tis an absurdity to employ any of them in 
defining the rest.  By this observation we reject at once all the vulgar definitions, which p hilosophers have 
given of power and efficacy; and instead of searching for the idea in these definitions, must look for it in the 
impressions, from which it is originally deriv’d.  If it be a compound idea, it must arise from compound 
impressions. If simpl e, from simple impressions. ”  (T 1.3.14.4 , cf. E 7.3, 8.25 n. 19 )  
7. Understanding these terms involves having a certain simple  idea, which is copied 
from a corresponding  impression  of reflection  
• E 7.8 n. 12 presumes that “the idea of power” is an “original, simple idea”; see also  T 1.3.14.4 above.  
(The following interpretative discussion, being relatively speculative, is omitted from the presentation .) 
• But this is puzzling, given that necessary connexion  is clearly a relation  (cf. T 1.3.2.6, 11), a nd relations 
seem inevitably complex , as Hume himself acknowledges ( T 1.1.4 .7).  Likewise , power  must be understood, 
he says, as relative  to an effect ( E 7.14, 7.29 n.  17), apparently implying complexity.   The obvious  solution 
(cf. Millican 2007b §2.2) is to interpret  Hume as attempting to identify a simple common  element  in all of 
the various relational notions  that he is investigating  – we might call this consequentiality . 
• Hume finds the crucial impression by shifting from causal to inferential  consequentiality.  This makes best 
sense if he is implicitly appealing to a Lockean  faculty of reflection  (cf. Locke’s Essay  II i 4), which enables 
us to monitor  our mental operations, and thus to become aware when an inference  is taking  place (rather than 
simply experiencing a succession of thoughts and feelings).  
• Elsewhere , the Treatise  suggests that “impressions of reflection ” (“internal impressions” ) are confined to  
“passions, desires, and emotions” ( T 1.1.2.1, cf. 1.1.1.1, 1.1.6.1 , 1.2.3.3 ).  The Enquiry  seems more Lockean,  
talking of “reflection on the operations  of our own minds” ( E 7.9, cf. 7.25) . 
• This Lockean  perspective could  explain why Hume describes the impr ession as a  “determination” of the 
mind or thought ( T 1.3.14.20, 22, 29; 1.4.7.5), or a customary “transition of the imagination” ( E 7.28, 30)  – 
it is not so much a feeling , as reflective awareness  of such inference taking place .  Hence “that inference of 
the understanding  [is] the only connexion, that we can have any  comprehension of ” (E 8.25) , because we are 
able to grasp it as a movement of the mind from A to B . 
• This account could also explain  how the idea copied from that impression might plausibly  be seen as essential  
to a correct understanding of causation,  and in some sense attributable  to external causes and effects (such 
as the motion of billiard balls)  – whereas  attributing a  mere su bjective feeling  would be  bizarre . 
• However we interpret the impression, Hume clearly sees his quest as succeed ing when that impression  is 
identified  (T 1.3.14.20, 22; E 7.28, 30) , thus legitimating  the idea through the Copy Principle  (so his attitude 
to the idea of power o r necessary connexion is quite different from his attitude to our thoughts of external 
objects or selves, which turn out to be fictions  (T 1.4.2.29, 36, 42 -3, and 52; T 1.4.6.6 -7).  4 8. That impression arises from observed constant conjunction  and the consequent 
tendency to draw inductive inferences  
• “Perhaps ’twill appear in the end, that the necessary connexion depends on the inference, instead of the 
inference’s depending on the necessary connexion” ( T 1.3.6.3).   This is best taken as referring to the origin 
of the idea  of necessity , through  instinctive customary inference from a present impression.  
• But once we have explicitly ascribed a causal connexion between A and B, the order of explanation changes, 
and we c an go on to make further  inferences – often of great complexity – based on that ascriptio n (so now 
the inference depends on the ascription) .  This is no longer instinctive: careful reflective reasoning is often 
needed  to distinguish genuine causal relation s from those that are merely superficial ( e.g. T 1.3.13 , 1.3.15 ). 
9. Hume accordingly provides two defin itions  of cause  
• “We may define a cause to be [1] ‘An object precedent and contiguous to another, and where all the objects 
resembling the former are plac’d  in like relations of precedency and contiguity to those objects, that resemble 
the latter. ’  If this definition be esteem’d defective, because drawn from objects foreign to the cause, we may 
substitute this other definition in its place, viz. [2] ‘A cause  is an object precedent and contiguous to another, 
and so united with it, that the idea of the one determines the mind to form the idea of the other, and the 
impression of the one to form a  more lively idea of the other.’   (T 1.3.14.31)  
• “Similar objects ar e always conjoined with similar.  Of this we have experience.  Suitably to this experience, 
therefore, we may define a cause to be [1] an object, followed by another, and where all the objects, similar 
to the first, are followed by objects similar to the s econd .  …  The appearance of a cause always conveys the 
mind, by a customary transition, to the idea of the effect.  Of this also we have experience.  We may, therefore, 
suitably to this experience, form another definition of cause; and call it, [2] an object follo wed by another, 
and whose appearance always conveys the thought to that other .”  (E 7.29)  
• It seems unlikely that Hume inten ds these as  analytical specification s of necessary and sufficient conditions .  
He knows  that customary inference can occur in respect  of conjunctions that are very far from constant ( e.g. 
T 1.3.13.7) , and that  genuine constant conjunctions can lie undiscovered, so that “philosophers” who wish to 
identify them have to go to great trouble to do so (as at T 1.3.12.5 and E 8.13-15, as well as T 1.3.15 , cf. §1 
and §5  above ).  So the two definitions will often in practice come apart.  
• Hume’s  primary aim is to investigate  our understanding of the relation of cause and effect  in terms of the 
conditions in which that idea arises, and the impressio n from which it is copied .  This is, accordingly, what 
the definitions aim to encapsulate, focusing on  the crucial idea of power or necessary connex ion. 
10. Hume also provides two definitions of necessity, which he applies to the issue of 
“liberty and necessit y”  
• The definitions of cause and of necessity are separately indexed in the  volume of the  Essays and Treatises   
that contains  the Enquiry : “CAUSE  and EFFECT  ... Its Definition” refers to E 7.29 and 8.25 n. 19; “ NECESSITY , 
its definition” refers to E 8.5 and 8.27  (see Hume 1748, pp.  229-30): 
• “Our idea, therefore, of necessity and causation arises entirely from the uniformity, observable in the 
operations of nature; where similar objects are constantly conjoined together, a nd the mind is determined by 
custom to infer the one from the appearance of the other.  These two circumstances form the whole of that 
necessity, which we ascribe to matter.   Beyond [1] the constant conjunction  of similar objects, and  [2] the 
consequent inference  from one to the other, we have no notion of any necessity, or connexion. ”  (E 8.5) 
• “ Necessity may be defined two ways, conformably to the two definitions of cause , of which it makes an 
essential part.  It consists either [1] in the constant conjun ction of like objects, or [2] in the inference of the 
understanding from one object to another. ”  (E 8.27; T 2.3.2.4 is very similar)  
• “‘… Here then are two particulars, which we are to regard as essential to necessity, viz. [1] the constant union  
and [2] the inference  of the mind; and wherever we discover these we must acknowledge a necessity. ’  ...  
this reasoning puts the whole controversy in a new light, by giving a new definition of necessity.  … the … 
advocates for free -will must allow this union and inference with regard to human actions.  They will only 
deny, that this makes the whole of necessity.  But then they must shew, that we have an idea of something 
else in the actions of matter; which, accord ing to the foregoing reasoning, is impossible. ”  (A 32-4) 
• Hence those such as Clarke who attempt to draw a distinction between physical  necessity and moral  necessity 
are refuted: they cannot even form a coherent idea of the “something else” that they wish to attribute to “the 
actions of matter ” (see also the corollary of the two definitions at T 1.3.14.33) .  Hume’s emphatic use of this 
argument – consistently in all three works – conclusively refutes the “New Hume” interpretation which takes 
Hume himself to  be deny ing that satisfaction of his two definitions “makes the whole of necessity”.   5 11. When the two definitions come apart, constant conjunction  dominates  
• According to Hume, we should endeavour to discover the reliable causal conjunctions that underlie 
super ficial inconsistencies ( T 1.3.12.5 , E 8.13-15), to identify  high-level general rules  that can  overcome 
prejudices ( T 1.3.13.11 -12), and to apply  the rules by which to judge of causes and effect s (T 1.3.15 ) “to 
distinguish the accidental circumstances from the efficacious causes”  (T 1.3.13.11).  
• When we are unable to identify genuinely constant  causal relationships, we should condition  our expectations 
by the experienced frequencies ( most explicitly at E 10.3-4, cf. T 1.3.11 -12; E 6). 
• In discussing whether “matter and motion” ( T 1.4.5.29, 33) could possibly be the cause of thought, Hume 
concludes: “ that all objects, which are found to be constantly conjoin’d, are upon that account only to be 
regarded as causes and effects.  Now as all objects, which are not contrary, are susceptible of a constant 
conjunction, and as no real objects are contrary; it follows, that for ought we can determine by the mere 
ideas, any thing may b e the cause or effect of any thing; which evidently gives the advantage to the 
materialists above their antagonists. ”  (T 1.4.5.32)  
• Hume frequently emphasises the priority of the first definition by stating that “the very essence” of power, 
cause and effect, or necessity is constituted by “constant conjunction of objects” ( T 1.4.5.33) , “multiplicity 
of resembling instances” ( T 1.3.14.16), “constancy" ( E 8.25 n.  19) or “uniformity” ( T 2.3.1.10).  S ometimes 
he remarks that such consistent patterns w ould provide a perfectly informed observer with a reliable basis 
for inductive inference  (T 2.3.2.2 , E 8.22 n.  18), but even then  it is the potential  for such inference – and 
hence the uniformities themselves – that constitutes “the very essence” of causal necessity,  not t he actual  
occurrence of an y inference based on them . 
• There is a suggestive parallel with the two definitions of virtue or “personal merit” in the second Enquiry  (in 
terms of [1] “mental qualities, useful or agreeable to the person himself or to others” at M 9.1 cf. 9.12; or 
[2] “whatever mental action or qua lity gives to a spectator the pleasing sentiment of approbation” at 
M Appx  1.10).  In this case , too, Hume’s critical discussion of the “monkish virtues” at M 9.3 strongly 
suggests that the objective definition should dominate if the two come apart.  
12. In the first Enquiry , Hume recognises more sophisticated causal relations  than 
in the Treatise , mediated by quantitative powers and forces  
• In the Treatise , Hume seems to be thinking of causal relations as holding almost exclusively between discrete 
types of event : hence his talk of “constant conjunction” .  Even the “rules by which to judge of causes and 
effects ” talk of the absolute presence or absence of particular causal factors:   
“4. The same cause always produces the same effect, and the same eff ect never arises but from the same 
cause.  ...  
5. ... where several different objects produce the same effect, it must be by means of some quality, which we 
discover to be common amongst them ...  
6. ...  The difference in the effects of two resembling obje cts must proceed from that particular, in which they 
differ.  ...  
8.  ... an object, which exists for any time in its full perfection without any effect, is not the sole cause of that 
effect ... ”  (T 1.3.15.6 -8, 10)  
• Only the seventh rule gives any hint tha t we might be dealing with varying quantities, which cannot therefore 
be characterised in terms of discrete types  of “object” :  
“7. When any object encreases or diminishes with the encrease or diminution of its cause, ’tis to be regarded 
as a compounded ef fect, deriv’d from the union of the several different effects, which arise from the several  
different parts of the cause.”  ( T 1.3.15.9)  
• But even this is very crude  and unscientific, given that Newtonian physics treat s the impact  of billiard balls 
not in  terms of “motion in the first ball” causing “motion in the second”  (or even “parts of the cause” etc.) , 
but rather, in terms of the relevant velocities , masses , angles , coefficient of restitution , momentum , and so 
forth – all of these being arithmetically quantifiable on a continuous scale.  
• The Enquiry  recognises this, e.g. conservation of momentum: “ it is a law of motion, discovered by 
experience, that the moment or force of any body in motion is in the com pound ratio or proportion of its solid 
contents and its velocity ” (E 4.13) .  Going on to discuss induction, Hume refers back to  “that wonderful force 
or power, which would carry on a moving body for ever in a continued change of place, and which bodies 
never lose but by communicating it to others ” (E 4.16) , talks of “secret powers” (E 4.16, 21), and couches 
his argument in terms of constant conjunction  between the “sensible qualities” and the “secret powers”  
(rather than between “objects” as in the Treatise ).  6 • Two footnotes in Enquiry  7 help to bring quantitative “powers” within the scope of Hume’s theory of 
causation, generalising beyond mere constant conjunction – and even beyond multi -factor interactions – to 
include arithmetical functional relationships.  But Hume’s main point in them seems to be his insistence that 
our only grasp of such powers  is relational, that we understand them in terms of their perceived effects:  
•  “We find by experience, that a body at rest or in motion continues for ever in its present state, till put from 
it by some new cause; and that a body impelled takes as much motion from the impelling body as it acquires 
itself.  These are facts.  When we cal l this a vis inertiae , we only mark these facts, without pretending to have 
any idea of the inert power; in the same manner as, when we talk of gravity, we mean certain effects, without 
comprehending that active power. ”  (E 7.25 n.16)  
• “According  to these e xplications and definitions, the idea of power  is relative as much as that of cause; and 
both have a reference to an effect, or some other event constantly conjoined with the former.  When we 
consider the unknown  circumstance of an object, by which the deg ree or quantity of its effect is fixed and 
determined, we call that its power: And accordingly, it is allowed by all philosophers, that the effect is the 
measure of the power.  But if they had any idea of power, as it is in itself, why could not they measu re it in 
itself?  The dispute whether the force of a body in motion be as its velocity, or the square of its velocity; this 
dispute, I say, needed not be decided by comparing its effects in equal or unequal times; but by a direct 
mensuration and comparison .”  (E 7.29 n. 17)  
Philosophical Interpretation of Hume’s Theory:  
Reductionist, Subjectivist, Projectivist, or Sceptical  Realist?  
All of th e points established above fit easily with a traditional reductionist interpretation of Hume’s theory.  
Reductionism  is clearly consistent with causal objectivity (§1), and with the provision of definitions in terms 
of non -causal relations such as priority, contiguity and constant conjunction (§2 and §9).  It is also entirely 
consistent with treating necessary connexion  as essential  to causation, as long as this necessary connexion itself 
is also understood reductively, through parallel  definitions (§3 and §10), rather than – for example – being 
treated as some variety of absolute  modality (§4).  Reductionism is also enti rely consistent with determinism 
(§5), as long as that doctrine is interpreted accordingly, in terms of universal conformity to regular laws  (rather 
than any supposed metaphysical “straitjacket”) .  And of course reductionism is the most natural way of read ing 
Hume’s discussion of the “idea of necessary connexion”, where he seeks the meaning  of causal terms by tracing 
the relevant impression (§§6 -8).  The main objections to interpreting Hume as reductionist have come from the 
apparent conflict between his tw o definitions, and his apparent subjectivism.  The former objection is implicitly 
countered by §§11 -12, which show how the first definition – and objective functional relationships – dominate 
the second definition (based on “intuitive” causal inference).  The latter objection is dealt with in the following 
section, followed by a brief review of the other popular interpretative options.  
Hume’s Rejection of Subjectivism in the Enquiry  
The Treatise  contains numerous passages that appear to assert the subjectiv ity of causal necessity , of which the 
following are only the most straightforward:  
“Necessity, then, ... is nothing but an internal impression of the mind” ( T 1.3.14.20);  “necessity is something, 
that exists in the mind, not in objects” ( T 1.3.14.22);  “the necessity or power ... lies in the determination of 
the mind ...  The efficacy or energy of causes is [not] plac’d in the causes themselves ...; but belong s entirely 
to the soul ”. (T 1.3.14.23);  “power and necessity ... are ... qualities of perceptions, not of objects” ( T 
1.3.14.24);  “this connexion, tie, or energy lies merely in ourselves, and is nothing but that determination of 
the mind ...” ( T 1.4.7.5);  “the necessity ... is nothing but a determination of the mind” ( T 2.3.1.4);  “the 
necessary connexion is merely a p erception of the mind” ( T 2.3.1.6).  
By contrast, the Enquiry  only twice suggests that causal necessity is subjective:  
“When we say, therefore, that one object is connected with another, we mean only, that they have acquired 
a connexion in our thought, and give rise to this inference ...” ( E 7.28)  
“The necessity of any action, whether of matter or of mind, is not, properly speaking, a quality in the agent, 
but in any thinking or intelligent being, who may consider the action; and it consists chiefly in the 
determination of his thoughts to infer the existence of that action from some preceding objects” ( E 8.22 n.  18)  7 The latter has limited significance, since it is a note copied from the Treatise, explaining “the prevalence of the 
doctrine of liberty” and desc ribing necessity in terms of potential  and idealised  (not actual) inference.  
The placement of E 7.28 would give it far greater significance, except that its subjectivist implication is negated 
in the very next paragraph, after the two definitions have been  presented:  
“We say, for instance, that the vibration of this string is the cause of this particular sound.  But what do we 
mean by that affirmation?  We either mean, that this vibration is followed by this sound, and that all similar 
vibrations have been followed by similar sounds: Or, that this vibration is followed by this sound, and that 
upon the appearance of one, the mind anticipates the senses, and forms immediately an idea of the other.  We 
may consider the relation of cause and effect in either of these two lights; but beyond these, we have no idea 
of it.” ( E 7.29)  
It seems, therefore, that before the two definitions (e.g. at E 7.28), Hume is focusing on the subjective origin 
of our idea of necessary connexion, but that having presented them, he the n allows that causal necessity can be 
understood either  in terms of constant conjunction or in terms of customary inference.4 
Hume’s Supposed “Projectivism ” about Causation (and Morality ) 
The idea that Hume is a “projectivist” has most often been discussed  with reference to these two passages:  
“This contrary biass is easily accounted for.  ’Tis a common observation, that the mind has a great propensity 
to spread itself on external objects, and to conjoin with them any internal im pressions, which they occasi on, 
... the same propensity  is the reason, why we suppose necessity and power to lie in the object s ..., not in our 
mind,  ...”  (T 1.3.14.25)  
“Thus the distinct boundaries and offices of reason  and of taste  are easily ascertained.  The former conveys 
the k nowledge of truth and falsehood: The latter gives the sentiment of beauty and deformity, vice and virtue.   
The one discovers objects as they really stand in nature, without addition or diminution: The other has a 
productive faculty, and gilding or staining  all natural objects with the colours, borrowed from internal 
sentiment, raises, in a manner, a new creation. ”  (M App 1.21)  
In the first passage, Hume is explaining away an erroneous objection to his theory of necessary connexion , not 
endorsing  such “projection”.  The second passage seems approving of “projection” in the moral case, but notice 
that he is here distinguishing  between the “boundaries and offices” of reason  and taste , saying that reason  
“conveys the kn owledge of truth and falsehood”  and “discovers objects as they really stand in nature, without 
addition or diminution”,5 while taste  gilds or stains.   But crucially, Hume himself clearly considers  causal 
judgement s as lying  within the domain of reason ,6 thus standardly representing obje cts without addition or 
diminution .  The sentimental gilding that he associates with taste , and which distinguishes it from reason , 
appears  to involve its action -guiding nature and its association with human desires (e.g. EPM  App 1.18-20, cf. 
T 3.1.1.6 ).  Thus Hume’s distinction between reason  and taste here seems to come down to the familiar divide 
between the cognitive and the conative.  And so far from “ gilding or staining ” being a unifying theme  across  
Hume’s theories of causation and morality, its application to moral judgement s is precisely what pushes them  
into the category of taste, thereby  distinguish ing them  sharply from causal judgement s.7 
 
4 This s eems relatively clear in the Enquiry , and might  perhaps  also be taken to provide a clue to the interpretation of the Treatise , 
for example on the supposition that Hume had a similar view  there but failed to express it  clearly, having overdramatised the 
subjectivism of his position  for rhetorical effect . 
5 Reason  here is accordingly our cognitive  faculty, “by which we discern Truth and Falshood” (1748, 1.4 n., cf. P 5.1), whether 
of relations of ideas or matters of fact (e.g. T 3.1.1.9; M App 1.6).  For exte nsive discussion of this notion of reason, and its 
relation to “the imagination” within Hume’s thinking, see Millican (2012, §§3.2 -3). 
6 M App  1.2-3 repeatedly emphasises that “ reason  instructs us in the several tendencies of actions”.  See also T 2.3.3.3:  “the 
causes and effects ... are pointed out to us by reason and experience”; T 3.1.1.12: “reason, in a strict and philosophical sense, ... 
discovers the connexion of causes and effects”.  
7 We can still find a  genuine  element of “projectivism” in Hume’ s theory of causation, arising from his Copy Principle which 
obliges him to seek an “impression of reflection” to ground any idea that is not straightforwardly sensory .  It is then almost 
inevitable, if his quest succeeds, that the “internal” impression he identifies can be construed as “projected” when represented 
through that idea.   But then the link between Hume’s theories of causation, morals and aesthetics is revealed as relatively shallow, 
based on his overt empiricism, rather than any de ep theory of projectivist objectification.   8 The New Hume  
As we have seen , Hume consistently treats co nstant conjunction (and elaborations thereof, as in § 12 above) as 
the criterion of causal truth, and insists repeatedly that we can have no conception whatever of causal necessity 
that goes beyond his two definitions .  Even more significantly, he present s important arguments – concerning 
materialism in T 1.4.5.29 -33, and liberty and necessity in T 2.3.1 -2, A 31-4 and E 8 – that depend crucially on 
this claim.   The latter argument is especially emphatic in this respect : 
• It is consistent in all three works : the Treatise , the Abstract , and (all the many editions of) the Enquiry . 
• It includes  explicit anticipations of the protests to be expected from those  who take  physical causation to 
involve  some kind of necess ity that is stronger than  Hume’s  two definitions . 
• Such opponents deny that satisfaction of the definitions “makes the whole of necessity” ( A 34), “maintain 
there is something else in the operations of matte r” (T 2.3.2.4) , and thus “rashly suppose, that we have some 
farther idea of necessity and causation in the operations of external objects” ( E 8.22) .  Hume’s  response is to 
insist  that his analysis shows any such idea to be  “impossible” ( A 34), and h ence that “there is no idea of any 
other necessity or connexion in the actions of body ” (E 8.27. cf. T 2.3.2.4 ). 
• He highlights  the same point at the beginning  of the Enquiry  version of the argument : “Beyond the constant 
conjunction of similar objects, and the consequent inference from one to the other, we have no notion of any 
necessity, or connexion. ” (E 8.5).  This occurs only six paragraphs after Hume’s two definitions of cause 
(E 7.29), and is where he starts applying them to solve “the long disputed questi on concerning liberty and 
necessity” ( E 8.2), “the most contentious question, of metaphysics, the most contentious science” ( E 8.23).  
• Nobody reading Sections 7 and 8 of the Enquiry  together could reasonably be in any doubt that the definitions 
have been pr esented expressly  with a view to this crucial application , for which it seems that they must serve  
the role of delimiting what we can properly mean  by causal power and necessity .  
The “New Hume” interpretation identifies Hume’s own position as taking  causa tion to involve something 
beyond his two definitions – exactly the position of his opponents in this argument!  New Humean attempts to 
address this problem  have been unsuccessful, as most Hume scholars agree.8  Unless and until there is a credible  
reply  from the New Humean side, therefore, their position can reasonably be considered refuted : it is not 
plausible to interpret Hume as believing in a “thick” kind of causation outrun ning his two definitions.9 
Even if New Humean interpretation s could  somehow evade  this apparently devastating  objection, others would  
remain.  One is the sheer difficulty of making appropriate sense of Hume’s texts, including his main argument 
concerning  “the idea of necessary connexion” , his statements of what he takes that argument to achiev e 
(e.g. T 1.3.2.4, 1.3.14.2;  E 7.3-5), and the corollaries and other conclusions that he draws from his definitions 
(at T 1.3.14.32 -6, and as explained above ).  Strawson, for example, ignores Hume’s  statements  of purpose  and 
instead devot es eight chapters (14  to 21) to going through the Treatise  and Enquiry  discussions  giving his own 
gloss on a sequence of passages, apparently chosen  because they contain  alleged “ Referring uses of Causation 
terms” (§14.2) .  Fitting his interpretation with the text, moreover, requires  making the implausible  claim that 
Hume is an objectivist about power , but subjectivist about causal necessity ,10 despite Hume’s explicitly and 
 
8 For example, both Ott (2011) and Willis (2015, p.  205 n.  43) allude to a general view that “ the New Hume debate has run its 
course ” and been “ended ... once and for all” by the objection from liberty and necessi ty.  Hakkarainen (2012), p. 307 n. 36 refers 
to the objection as “devastating”, while Ainslie (2012) describes Winkler (1991) and Millican (2009) as “persuasive rebuttals ” 
of the New Hume.  My sense from discussion with other scholars confirms that this vi ew is widespread.  
9 For an initial presentation of the argument from “liberty and necessity” against the New Hume, see Millican (2007a, §VIII) an d 
(2007b, pp.  244-5 and n.  74).  Beebee (2007) and Kail (2007, pp.  262-7) proposed answers, which were briefly addressed in 
Millican (2009), while  Wright (2009, pp.  183-6) suggested that T 2.3.2.4 must be  disingenuous.  The approaches of Beebee, 
Kail, and Wright were comprehensively criticised in Millican (2011), to which so far no reply has been offered.  Strawson  (2011, 
p. 63, n. 51), citing all four of these papers of mine, claims to have refuted  the objection without even engaging with it, alluding 
to three sections of his book ( §1.4, §2.4, and §2.7) in which the only reference to Hume’s discussions of liberty a nd necessity 
involves selective quotation from E 8.21 (p.  25), omitting even the most crucial parts of that paragraph.  His reissue of The Secret 
Connexion  (2014) fails to mention either the objection, or any of the papers (by Winkler and myself) in which it was urged.  
10 For Hume’s “global subjectivism about necessity” see Strawson (1989, §15.3).  Also note that in view of our earlier results, it 
is entirely straightforward to read Hume’s “referring uses of causation terms” as sincerely referring to objecti ve causal powers 
(and objective  causal necessities), without interpreting him in the New way.   9 repeated ly stating that these are equivalent, treating them as such , and even alternating  between them  within 
the very argument that is advertised ( E 7.3) as fixing their precise meaning . 
Another major  objection to  New Hume an interpret ation s arises from the ir need  to give content to the supposed 
“thick” notion of causal necessity  without involving  an impression -derived idea.  The ir standard recourse has 
been to interpret Hume as supposing  a hidden conceptual  necessity, such that  if A causes  B, then this means  
that A has some  property which, if only we knew of it, would sanction the inference that  B must  follow  with a 
priori certainty .11  But g iven Hume’s fondness for the  Conceivability Principle, it seems implausible t hat he 
could even seriousl y contemplate such conceptual necessities between “distinct existences”, let alone believe 
in them .  New Humeans have accordingly suggested  that his commitment to the Conceivability P rinciple must 
be less than it seems, but they face a n uphill battle given  the weight of textual evidence  against them , including 
of the order of thirty unqualified st atements of the p rinciple in the Treatise , Abstract , and Enquiry .12 
Hume an Objective Powers (if not, perhaps, powers in objects)  
We are left, then, with the traditional interpretation of Hume as a reductionist  about causation, and as this would 
imply (and is anyway strongly supported by §1, §5, §11, and §12):  
 Hume does believe in real causes . 
Since, m oreover , he sees causation as esse ntially involving  causal power or necessity  (§3 above) , it seems to 
follow that on his own interpretation of the relevant terms : 
 Hume also believes in real causal powers and real causal necessity . 
But does he believe in powers in objects ?  This is a more tricky question, quite independently of the issues 
about subjectivism discussed previously, for reasons raised in §12 above.  
As we have seen, i dentifying the relevant causes, powers, and necessities in a situation will often  require  careful 
and painstaking  investigation, including systematic observation , experimentation, and generalisation, in the 
attempt to devise laws – sometimes mathematically complex laws – capable of reducing the various phenomena 
to order.   Some of these , such as  the Newton ian laws , may involve quantitative factors  (e.g. momentum and 
kinetic energy)  that are naturally expressible in terms of “energy”, “force”, and “power” , and through  which 
one can relatively straightforwardly  correlate the factor  with the effect ( thus imply ing, in the language of E 7.29 
n. 17, “ that the effect is the measure of the power ”).  But t here is no  guarantee that th is will always be the case: 
not all causal laws are so simple.  Ironically, however , Hume’s apparently crude running -together of s o many  
terms (as in § 6 above) could help here , manifesting open -mindedness over the form that future theories might 
take.   If the “power” language of the Enquiry  is indeed intended to be thus open -minded, then it need  not 
indicate any commitment to powers in objects , but only – in a sense – to objective powers  (i.e. powers that are 
real and not mind -dependent ).  Accordingly,  when Hume talks of the “powers and force s” of objects, he can be 
understood as  referring to the characteristics – typically unknown, and quite likely quantitative – of both 
individual objects and their situations, that determine their behaviour in accordance with the appropriate laws 
of nature.   What then actually occurs  will be a holistic result of the entire array of “powers and forces” operative 
in the situation, quite different from the simplistic “inference from one object to another” suggested by his talk 
of “constant conjunction” , and sign ificantly more complicated than the scenarios envisaged in the Enquiry  
footnotes discussed in § 12 above, where an object’s behaviour is straightforwardly dependent on its own 
“power” .  How far Hume envisaged all this is unclear, but at any rate a consisten t Humean  position would 
probably be committed to objective powers , but not necessarily to powers in objects . 
 
11 Strawson calls this the “AP property” (1989, p.  111), and Kail the “reference -fixer for power” (2007, p.  256).  
12 See Millican (2007b, pp.  234-6) and (2009, §6),  which observe that both Kail (2003, p. 49) and Wright (1983, p.  103) confuse 
the Conceivability Principle with its converse (that inconceivability  implies impossibility ).  Hume sets limits on the latter, but 
never on the former (and see Millican 2017 for much more on Hume’s logic).  Despite his fondness for the AP property, Strawson 
does not  recognise or  address this problem  at all .  10 References  
Ainslie, Donald C. (2012), Review of Galen Strawson, The Evident Connexion , in Notre Dame Philosophical Reviews , at 
https://ndpr.nd.edu/news/the -evident -connexion -hume -on-personal -identity/ . 
Beebee, Helen (2007 ), “The Two Definitions and the Doctrine of Necessity ”, Proceedings of the Aristotelian Society  107, 
pp. 413-31. 
Hakkarainen , Jani (2012), “Hume’s Scepticism and Realism”, British Journal for the History of Philosophy  20, 
pp. 283-309. 
Hume, David (1739 -40), A Treatise of Human Nature: A Critical Edition , vol. 1, ed. David Fate No rton and Mary J. 
Norton , Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2007 (references indicated by “T”). 
Hume, David (1740), An Abstract of … A Treatise of Human Nature , included in both Hume (1739/40) and Hume (1748); 
references indicated by “ A” and given to paragraph numbe r. 
Hume, David (1741 -83), Essays, Moral, Political, and Literary , ed. Eugene F. Miller, Liberty Classics, 2nd edition 1987 
– references indicated by “Essays” , and given to page number  
Hume, David (1748 ), An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding , ed. Peter  Millican , Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
2007 (references indicated by “E”). 
Hume, David (1751 ), An Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals , ed. Tom L. Beauchamp , Oxford: Oxford  University 
Press, 1998 (references indicated by “M”). 
Hume, David (1757 /72), A Dissertation on the Passions and The Natural History of Religion : A Critical Edition , ed. Tom 
L. Beauchamp, Clarendon  Press, 2007  (references to Dissertation  indicated by “P”, and given to section and 
paragraph number ). 
Hume, David (1932 ), The Letters of David Hume , ed. J. Y. T. Greig, 2 vols,  Oxford: Clarendon Press (references indicated 
by “HL”). 
Kail, P. J. E. (2003), “Conceivability and Modality: A Lemma in an Argument in De fense of Skeptical Realism”, Hume 
Studies  29, pp.  43-61. 
Kail, P. J. E.  (2007 ), “How to understand Hume ’s realism ”, in Read and Richman (2007) , pp. 253-69. 
Locke, John (1690 ), An Essay Concerning Human Understanding , ed. P. H. Nidditch , Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975 
(“Essay ”). 
Millican, Peter (2007a ), “Humes Old and New: Four Fashionable Falsehoods, and One Unfashionable Truth ”, Proceedings 
of the Aristotelian Society, Supplementary Volume  81, pp. 163-99. 
Millican, Peter (2007b ), “Against the ‘New Hume ’”, in Read and Richman (2007) , pp. 211-52. 
Millican, Peter (2009), “Hume, Causal Realism, and Causal Science ”, Mind  118, pp. 647-712. 
Millican, Peter (2010),  “Hume ’s Determinism ”, Canadian Journal of Philosophy  40, pp.  611-42. 
Millican, Peter (2011), “Hume, Causal Realism, and Free Will”, in Keith Allen and Tom Stoneham (eds), Causation and 
Modern Philosophy  (New York: Routledge), pp.  123-65. 
Millican, Peter (2012), “Hume’s ‘Scepticism’ about Induction”, in Alan Bailey and Dan O’Brien (eds), The Continuum 
Companion to Hume  (London: Continuum), pp.  57-103. 
Millican, Peter (2016), “Hume’s Chief Argument”,  in Paul Russell (ed.), The Oxford Handboo k of Hume  (Oxford: Oxford 
University Press), pp.  82-108. 
Millican, Peter (2017), “Hume’s Fork, and His Theory of Relations”, Philosophy and Phenomenological Research  95, 
pp. 3-65. 
Ott, Walter (2011),  Review of Keith Allen and Tom Stoneham (eds), Causation and Modern Philosophy , in Notre Dame 
Philosophical Reviews , at http://ndpr.nd.edu/news/causation -and-modern -philosophy/ . 
Read, Rupert and Richman, Kenneth A. , eds (2007 ): The New Hume  Debate: Revised Edition , London: Routledge  (first 
edition was 2000 ). 
Strawson, Galen (1989 , 2014 ), The Secret Connexion: Causation, Realism, and David Hume , Oxford : Clarendon Press; 
second edition issued in 2014.  
Strawson, Galen (2011), The Evident Connex ion: Hume on Personal Identity , Oxford: Oxford University Press.  
Willis, Andre (2015), Toward a Humean True Religion , Pennsylvania: Pennsylvania State University Press.  
Winkler, Kenneth P. (1991 ), “The New Hume ”, in Read and Richman (2007) , pp.  52-74.  Originally published in  
Philosophical Review , 100, pp. 541-79. 
Wright, John P. (1983 ), The Sceptical Realism of David Hume , Manchester: Manchester University Press.  
Wright, John P. (2009 ), Hume’s “A Treatise of Human Nature ”, Cambridge: Cambridge Universit y Press.  