14
The Relation between Hume ’s
Two Enquiries
Peter Millican
The relation between Hume’ sEnquiries has many strands, running in both direc-
tions. Most of these involve similarities between the two works, often contrasting
with the Treatise of Human Nature from which they both trace their descent. Perhaps
most obvious in this respect is their elegant and engaging presentational style, andtheir relatively narrow focus compared with the more theoretically systematic andcomprehensive Treatise (see §1 below). The treatment of religion (§2) provides
another obvious contrast: the Enquiries are more explicitly hostile to religious
metaphysics and morality than the Treatise , though this too seems to be more a
presentational than philosophical difference, indicating not so much a change inHume ’s attitude towards religion, as in his willingness to display it.
A deeper parallel between the Enquiries is their forthright rejection of extreme
positions that were apparently endorsed in the Treatise. In two prominent cases (see
§3 below), this toning down is presented as a reconciliation between super ﬁcially
opposed positions: in Section 8 of the ﬁrstEnquiry , between the doctrines of liberty
and necessity; and in the second Enquiry , between the moral claims of reason and
sentiment. Here the Enquiry discussions seem to involve clariﬁcations of the Treatise
positions rather than abandonments, tidying up terminology and avoiding theextravagant statements that had previously given a misleadingly extreme impressionof Hume ’s philosophy.¹ In other cases —most notably the treatment of epistemo-
logical and moral scepticism —the relation between Hume’ s earlier and later views is
more controversial, usually owing to the relative obscurity of the Treatise . In Book 1
Part 4, Hume sometimes seems pulled into intensely upsetting extremes of scepti-cism, whereas the ﬁrstEnquiry urbanely expounds a far less threatening “mitigated
scepticism.” Some scholars see this as yet another example of clari ﬁcation rather than
revision, but in §4 I shall sketch my own view that Hume’ s attitude to epistemological
scepticism changed signi ﬁcantly between the two works.
Given the focus of this volume on the second Enquiry , the issue of moral scepti-
cism demands more detailed consideration. In §5 and §6 below, we shall see evidence
¹ Such statements include “the doctrine of liberty is . . . absurd . . . in one sense, and unintelligible in any
other ”(T 2.3.2.1); “Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions” (T 2.3.3.4).OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
of a very signi ﬁcant shift in Hume ’s position, not only presentationally —as mani-
fested by his forceful denial of moral scepticism in the second Enquiry —but also
substantially, in his formulation of powerful arguments that refute the Lockean
psychological egoism from which his thinking appears to have begun. The Treatise
itself displays an awareness that egoism is not the whole story, and much of Hume ’s
later case against it builds on points already anticipated there. But his eventual utter
rejection of egoism may have been inspired —and was at least cemented —by his
discovery of the arguments of Joseph Butler (to whom due credit is given in theoriginal ﬁrstEnquiry ). Following this change, Hume reinterprets the notions of
“sympathy ”and “humanity, ”and is able to abandon the sometimes convoluted
associationist explanations that he had previously relied on “to resolve [unsel ﬁsh
tendencies] ...b ya philosophical chymistry, . . . into . . . self-love ”(EPM App 2.4). As
explained in §7, this withdrawal from con ﬁdent associationism also has a parallel in
theﬁrstEnquiry , where Hume’ s modi ﬁed theory of belief and probability likewise
builds on points anticipated in the Treatise (especially the Appendix ). Realization of
these dif ﬁculties in his earlier positions may have contributed to Hume ’s tendency in
theEnquiries to minimize his dependence on associationist explanations, even where
he still ﬁnds them plausible.
Finally, we turn to what is perhaps the most interesting —though highly
controversial —issue regarding the philosophical relationship between the two Enqui-
ries, namely, the extent to which there is a genuine parallel between Hume’ s causal
and moral metaphysics. In his mature treatment of these issues, we see somesigniﬁcant methodological connections that were not present in the Treatise : most
notably, a strong emphasis on linguistic clari ﬁcation as a means of resolution,
culminating in the derivation of paired de ﬁnitions of the key concepts. §8 below
brings these discussions together, showing how Hume ’s use of his two de ﬁnitions of
“person al merit” in
 the second Enquiry can help us to interpret the two de ﬁnitions of
causal necessity in the ﬁrstEnquiry (and inherited from Treatise 1.3.14.31). It then
turns to the fashionable but somewhat anachronistic question whether Hume canappropriately be seen as a “projectivist ”about causation and morality. In the case of
causation, the textual evidence is weak unless we treat as “projection ”Hume ’s
empiricist insistence that causal attributions are to be understood in terms of ournatural tendency to draw causal inferences. There is stronger textual evidence in thecase of morality, with Hume’ s suggestion that moral taste “raises . . . a new creation, ”
but this comes from a paragraph whose point is to insist on “the distinct boundaries
and ofﬁ ces of reason and of taste ”(EPM App 1.21), attributing causal judgements to
the one, and moral judgements to the other. So although there are suggestive parallelsbetween them, Hume himself clearly saw fundamental differences here.
. Titles and Styles
Hume ’s most obvious motive for the major change in presentation between the
Treatise and the Enquiries was the much greater popular success of his Essays —
meanwhile published in 1741 and 1742 —compared with the disappointing reception
of the Treatise of 1739 –40. So when he “cast anew ”Book 1 of the Treatise in 1748
(MOL, 8), he published his new work as Philosophical Essays concerning HumanOUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
  
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
Understanding, prominently subtitled “By the A  of the Essays Moral and
Political. ”This title, however, was somewhat misleading, because the philosophical
discussion throughout is integrated and continuous, with later “essays ”building on
earlier ones and the work as a whole presenting a uni ﬁed picture. The same applied
even more to the “essays” that he initially wrote to recast his moral theory, and his
new publication appropriately appeared under a title that signalled a sustained and
uniﬁed investigation of a limited topic area: An Enquiry concerning the Principles of
Morals .²
The two recastings were brought together in 1753, as volumes 2 and 3 of the four-
volume Essays and Treatises on Several Subjects , and then closer still within the 1758
single-volume edition. Here they were joined by A Dissertation on the Passions —the
recast Treatise Book 2 —with the order of the three works re ﬂecting that of the
original Treatise (i.e. understanding, then passions, then morals). It was in this
1758 edition that what we now know as the ﬁrstEnquiry wasﬁnally given its
enduring title: An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding . Through this sequence
of events, we see the presentation of the moral Enquiry apparently in ﬂuencing —at
least to some extent— that of its older sibling. In written style, however, the in ﬂuence
goes the other way, and the second Enquiry broadly follows the ﬁrst: less academic
and technical than the Treatise , but still clearly “accurate and abstract ”philosophy
rather than “easy and humane, ”in the terms that Hume himself uses at EHU 1.8.³
Both works aim to present Hume ’s philosophy in a rigorous but relatively approach-
able way, “reconciling profound enquiry with clearness” (EHU 1.17), and in this both
succeed admirably. Admittedly there is some contrast here, with the second Enquiry
coming across as less technical and more “literary, ”partly because its most theoret-
ical discussions are relegated to appendices, and partly because it includes numerousallusions to history and classical writers. But neither contrast seems to have anydeeper philos
ophical signi ﬁcance: perhaps Hume simply took the view that the
subject of morals was better suited than “metaphysics ”to appeal to a general
audience, and also found the subject matter more conducive to illustration fromliterary sources. ⁴
. Religion and Irreligious Ethics
Hume had an intense critical interest in religion throughout his adult life, asmanifested in many of his philosophical writings. The 1739 –40Treatise , however,
² Two passages corrected in the errata to the ﬁrst edition (1751, 2.5n., now EPM App. 2.5, n. 60; and
EPM 3.34, n. 12) show that at least some of the second Enquiry was composed on the assumption that it
would appear as a set of essays.
³ At EHU 1.7 Hume begins an extended defence of “what is commonly called metaphysics ,”and the
second Enquiry identi ﬁes itself with this “speculative ”study of human nature at EPM 2.5, 6.22, App .2.5,
and App. 4.21.
⁴Hume had also recently read a great number of classical works, many of these in preparation for his
longest and most scholarly essay, “Of the Populousness of Ancient Nations. ”Though not published until
1752, Hume stated in a letter of 18 April 1750 to John Clephane that it was “The last thing I took my hand
from ”(HL i 139).OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
    ’    
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
makes relatively little explicit mention of it, apparently mainly for prudential reasons. ⁵
In December 1737, Hume wrote to Henry Home (later Lord Kames) that he was “at
present castrating my Work, that is, cutting off its noble Parts, that is, endeavouring it
shall give as little Offence as possible ”to make it suitable for presentation to Bishop
Joseph Butler, whose good opinion he sought (NHL 2). This caution did not prevent
the implicit “downright Atheism ”of the Treatise being held against him when he
applied for a Chair at Edinburgh in 1745 (LFG 15), and by 1747 he seems to havecome to the conclusion that he might as well be more candid, remarking to JamesOswald: “I see not what bad consequences follow, in the present age, from the
character of an in ﬁdel; especially if a man ’s conduct be in other respects irreproach-
able ”(HL i 106). In 1748 he wrote to Kames, who had tried to dissuade him from
publishing the ﬁrstEnquiry :“I won’ t justify the prudence of this step, any other way
than by expressing my indifference about all the consequences that may follow ”(HL i
111). The Enquiry duly appeared, with its incisively critical discussions of the Free
Will Defence (EHU 8.32 –6), miracle reports (Section 10), the Design Argument
(Section 11), and various other topics in religious epistemology. Three years later, in1751, the concluding section of the second Enquiry added to this critique an
entertainingly withering attack on religious morality and its “monkish virtues ”
(EPM 9.3, cf. §8 below).
The main anti-religious impact of the second Enquiry , however —like that of
Treatise Book 3 —is in providing an account of morality which is entirely naturalistic,
building on the basis of the human condition and human sentiments, with absolutelyno resort to “superstition ”in the form of supposed divine commands or posthumous
retribution etc. This reﬂ ects back on at least two discussions in the ﬁrstEnquiry ,
namely of “liberty and necessity ”in Section 8, and of “a future state ”in Section 11. In
the former, Hume explains that “remote considerations ”about the divinely ordained
ordering of the universe (or, by extension, about determinism in general) cannot
undermine morality, since this is founded on sentiment rather than metaphysics
(EHU 8.35). Hume takes our moral sentiments and judgements to be responsive to“qualities of the mind, ”⁶and this provides another link with his discussions of liberty
and necessity (in both the Treatise and the ﬁrstEnquiry ), where he argues that causal
necessity, so far from undermining morality, is essential to it:
The only proper object of hatred or vengeance, is a person or creature, endowed with thought
and consciousness; . . . Actions are, by their very nature, temporary and perishing; and where
they proceed not from some cause in the character and disposition of the person who
⁵The doctrines of the Treatise do, however, have quite signi ﬁcant anti-theistic implications that Hume
does not point out, as explored extensively by Paul Russell, The Riddle of Hume ’s Treatise: Skepticism,
Naturalism, and Irreligion (New York: Oxford University Press, 2008). For a brief survey of Hume ’s
attitude to religion and his relevant works, including discussion of his use of irony and dialogue to disguise
his more incendiary views, see Peter Millican, Reading Hume on Human Understanding: Essays on the First
Enquiry (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 2002), pp. 34 –40. Note that Section 11 of the ﬁrstEnquiry prudently
discusses the Design Argument in dialogue form, and the second Enquiry discusses moral relativism in “A
Dialogue, ”effectively a third appendix in the 1751 edition (and from 1777 a ﬁfth). The Dialogues
concerning Natural Religion , though published only posthumously in 1779, were apparently written mainly
in 1751 –52, being started shortly after completion of the second Enquiry .
⁶See for example T 3.2.5.4, 3.3.1.3, 3.3.1.30, 3.3.5.1, EPM 1.10, 8.0, n. 50, 9.12.OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
  
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
performed them, they can neither redound to his honour, if good; nor infamy, if evil . . . .
actions render a person criminal, merely as they are proofs of criminal principles in the
mind . . . But, except upon the doctrine of necessity, they never were just proofs, and conse-quently never were criminal. (EHU 8.29 –30, cf. T 2.3.2.5 –7)
This argument sharpens the dif ﬁculty of the Problem of Evil, which Hume raises a
few paragraphs later (albeit with prudent obliqueness). If morality requires that our
actions be determined by our character, then there is no prospect for any satisfactory
explanation of “how the Deity can be the mediate cause of all the actions of men,
without being the author of sin and moral turpitude ”(EHU 8.36). “These are
mysteries, ”Hume continues, which inevitably involve us in “difﬁculties, and even
contradictions ”—making his anti-theistic conclusion fairly obvious, though unstated.
The connection between Hume’ s naturalistic moral theory and Section 11 of the
ﬁrstEnquiry is related, but even less explicit. Here the relevant question (EHU 11.4,
19–22, 27 –8) is whether atheism and the denial of a future state pose a threat to
morality. Hume’ s“sceptical friend ”argues that they cannot do so, because any
inference to the supposed deity ’s moral qualities (such as might be thought to
determine what awaits us in a future state) must be drawn from the world as weﬁnd it, and hence cannot “give us measures of conduct and behaviour different from
those which are furnished by re ﬂections on common life ”(EHU 11.27). In his own
voice, Hume offers the response (11.28) that even if theories about divine moralityare fanciful, nevertheless people may be in ﬂuenced by them; hence undermining
belief in divine punishment could be morally dangerous even if logically justi ﬁed. But
he quickly moves on to defend religious tolerance on other grounds (EHU 11.29),and the main question is rather left hanging. ⁷Hume ’s real answer becomes apparent
not in the ﬁrstEnquiry but the second (and also The Natural History of Religion ,
Sections 9 –10 and 13 –14), where as noted above he reveals that so far from viewing
religion as a potential support for morality, he sees it rather as a corrupting in ﬂuence.
Moreover, he considers morality quite capable of naturalistic defence, being fullyexplicable in terms of the human situation (EPM 3.1 –21) and personally recom-
mendable as conducive to mutual cooperation, social harmony, self-respect, and
peace of mind (EPM 9.14 –25).
. Presentational Clariﬁ cation and Compromise
Although the two Enquiries are relatively forthright in their opposition to religion, in
other respects they present Hume’ s philosophy as being signi ﬁcantly less sceptical
and corrosive of orthodox positions than the impression given by the Treatise .
Whether these changes are super ﬁcial and merely presentational, or whether on the
other hand they re ﬂect deeper developments in Hume ’s own views, are in some cases
controversial questions, and we shall come back to the most important of these
shortly (in §§4 –7 below). But in at least some respects, the move from Treatise to
Enquiries does seem to be mainly presentational, involving clari ﬁcation and
⁷For a more detailed account of the arguments of this section, see J. C. A. Gaskin, “Religion: The Useless
Hypothesis.” In Millican, Reading Hume , pp. 349 –69; see especially pp. 365– 8.OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
    ’    
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
reﬁnement of Hume ’s position to tone down its misleadingly paradoxical appear-
ance, rather than fundamental philosophical change.
Perhaps the most obvious instance of this comes in Section 8 of the ﬁrstEnquiry ,
where Hume ’s theory of “liberty and necessity ”is essentially unchanged from that of
theTreatise , though presented in very different terms. In the Treatise , Hume fre-
quently equates “liberty ”with chance (T 2.3.1.15, 2.3.2.2, 2.3.2.6, 2.3.2.7, 2.3.2.8) or
indifference (T 2.3.1.3, 2.3.2.2), and he explicitly attacks “the doctrine of liberty ”so
understood as “absurd ”or“unintelligible ”(T 2.3.2.1, cf. 2.3.1.18). This forthright
denial of human liberty can come across as very radical, but it is also somewhat
anomalous, given Hume’ s own statement that “liberty, ”in“the most common sense
of the word, ”is to be understood not as “liberty of indifference ”but rather “liberty of
spontaneity ,”characterized as “that which is oppos ’d to violence ”and as “that species
of liberty, which it concerns us to preserve” (T 2.3.2.1). The Enquiry clears up this
confusion and moderates the radical language, by instead presenting a “reconciling
project” (EHU 8.23) between the doctrines of liberty and necessity, arguing in favour
of both of them on the basis of appropriate de ﬁnitions. “Liberty ”is now to be
understood as “a power of acting or not acting, according to the determinations of
the will; that is, if we chuse to remain at rest, we may; if we chuse to move, we alsomay ”(EHU 8.23). ⁸Byrenouncing
 any sceptical denial of human freedom, Hume is
better able to argue for the point that really concerns him, namely the application ofdeterministic causal understanding to human behaviour.
Another instance of presentational compromise concerns the role of reason within
morality, the subject of some of the Treatise ’s most notoriously extravagant rhetoric:
“Reason is, and ought only to be the slave of the passions ”(T 2.3.3.4); “’Tis not
contrary to reason to prefer the destruction of the whole world to the scratching ofmyﬁnger” (T 2.3.3.6); “Reason is wholly inactive, and can never be the source of so
active a principle as . . . a sense of morals ”(T 3.1.1.10). Such passages might seem to
imply that reason is irrelevant to motivation or morality, and have often been read asstating at least that the products of reason —namely beliefs —cannot cause actions. But
as we shall discuss more fully in §5 below, Hume in the Treatise takes the view that
“the prospect of pain or pleasure ”—which is surely a reference to belief about likely
outcomes—is what most typically motivates our actions (T 2.3.3.3, 2.3.9.1), so thereseems to be a mismatch here. A related problem concerns the famous “Representa-
tion Argument ”of T 2.3.3.5 and 3.1.1.9, which gives at least some appearance of
attempting to settle a causal claim (about the in ﬂuence of reason) by a priori
considerations (about the nature of our passions), something which should be
⁸Most commentators have identi ﬁed this “hypothetical liberty ”(EHU 8.23) with the “liberty of
spontaneity ”that Hume alludes to in the Treatise . But as George Botterill points out, the mere “power
of acting or not acting ”—which is “universally allowed to belong to every one, who is not a prisoner and in
chains ”(EHU 8.23) —ﬁts very poorly as “the most common sense of the word ”or as “that species of liberty,
which it concerns us to preserve. ”Botterill absolves Hume of any confusion, but I suspect that in the
Treatise Hume was himself muddled in his understanding of “spontaneity, ”which had historically been
interpreted in various ways, sometimes involving re ﬂective judgement and sometimes mere voluntariness
(making it a poor basis from which to attempt to clarify Hume ’s own considered view). Fortunately, any
such confusion was decisively remedied in the Enquiry . See George Botterill, “Hume on Liberty and
Necessity. ”In Millican, Reading Hume , pp. 277– 300.OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
  
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
quite impossible on Humean principles. ⁹By the time he came to recast his work,
Hume had apparently recognized these problems, and he entirely omitted the
argument, and the misleading rhetoric, from both the second Enquiry and the
Dissertation on the Passions .¹⁰Indeed the Enquiry makes a point of reversing any
irrationalist impression, setting out a far more balanced view in the introductorysection, and clearly asserting the relevance of reason right at the start of the ﬁrst
Appendix, which is devoted to moral metaphysics:
I am apt to suspect, . . . that reason and sentiment concur in almost all moral determinations
and conclusions. (EPM 1.9)
One principal foundation of moral praise being supposed to lie in the usefulness of any quality
or action; it is evident, that reason must enter for a considerable share in all decisions of
this kind. (EPM App 1.2)
In this case the unclarity of the Treatise account makes it hard to assess how far
Hume has changed his view. But certainly the way in which he presents it is radically
different, in line with his general desire to play down —apparently sincerely —the
radical negativity of his earlier work. Indeed, the rhetoric of Section 1 of the second
Enquiry seems expressly designed to portray Hume’ s position as occupying a rea-
sonable middle ground and pursuing another “reconciling project, ”this time
between the claims of reason and sentiment.
. Rejecting Extreme Scepticism
Another important presentational difference between the Treatise and the Enquiries —
and arguably also a major philosophical development —is the change in Hume’ s
apparent attitude to scepticism, both epistemological and moral. In the Treatise ,
Hume does not explicitly address sceptical themes until Part 4 of Book 1, but when hedoes so, the sceptical arguments he expounds are extreme and corrosive, apparentlyundermining even his own philosophical endeavours.¹¹ The interpretation of hisposition here is highly controversial, but at least the super ﬁcial impression left by the
ﬁnal section of Book 1 —entitled “Conclusion of this book ”—is that scepticism carries
all before it:
I have already shewn, that the understanding, when it acts alone, and according to its most
general principles, entirely subverts itself, and leaves not the lowest degree of evidence in any
⁹For clear statements that no causal claim can be a priori, see T 1.3.15.1, 1.4.5.30; EHU 12.29.
¹⁰It is striking how much attention interpreters have paid to the Representation Argument —presented
so prominently in two different books of the Treatise —usually without any apparent awareness that Hume
dropped it from his recasting of both books. Here, as often elsewhere, Hume shows better judgement than
many of his commentators.
¹¹ For much more on the issues to be discussed here, see Peter Millican, “Hume ’s Chief Argument. ”In
The Oxford Handbook of David Hume , ed. Paul Russell (New York: Oxford University Press, 2016). There
I argue that the scepticism of the Treatise is indeed corrosive, in the sense of undermining Hume ’s own
scienti ﬁc ambitions, and that he ﬁnds himself unable to control it at the end of Book 1, resorting to a largely
ad hoc and unconvincing palliative to justify ignoring the problem. The ﬁrstEnquiry , while not entirely
settling the sceptical concerns, provides a far more convincing and satisfactory response to them, and
this —I believe —represents a signi ﬁcant change in Hume ’s philosophy, as well as in his presentation of it.OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
    ’    
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
proposition, either in philosophy or common life.... I a m ready to reject all belief and
reasoning, and can look upon no opinion even as more probable or likely than another.
(T 1.4.7.7 –8)
The highly critical 1745 pamphlet to which Hume ’sLetter from a Gentleman to his
friend in Edinburgh was a response found ample material in this concluding section
to press its ﬁrst major charge of “Universal Scepticism. ”¹² But that section is not
alone, and re ﬂects much of the tone and content of the preceding discussions in Part 4.
The ﬁrst sentence quoted above faithfully sums up the main argument of
Section 1.4.1 on “scepticism with regard to reason, ”perhaps the most corrosively
sceptical of any of Hume ’s arguments. The following section, on “scepticism with
regard to the senses, ”starts more optimistically with a complacent con ﬁdence in “the
existence of body ”(1.4.2.1), but by the end that con ﬁdence has completely evaporated,
with Hume now being “more inclin ’d to repose no faith at all in my senses, or rather
imagination, than to place in it such an implicit con ﬁdence. ”He continues in apparent
despair:
I cannot conceive how such trivial qualities of the fancy, conducted by such false suppositions,
can ever lead to any solid and rational system ....What then can we look for from this
confusion of groundless and extraordinary opinions but error and falshood? . . . ’Tis impossible
upon any system to defend either our understanding or senses; . . . Carelessness and in-
attention alone can afford us any remedy. (T 1.4.2.56– 7).
Yet more scepticism follows in Hume ’s discussion of “the modern philosophy ”and
its distinction between primary and secondary qualities, where he identi ﬁes“a direct
and total opposition betwixt our reason and our senses; . . . betwixt those conclusions
we form from cause and effect, and those that persuade us of the continu ’d and
independent existence of body ”(T 1.4.4.15). And although his account of the
“intellectual world ”is initially portrayed as free of “such contradictions ”as he has
“discover’ d in the natural ”(T 1.4.5.1), Hume ’s discussion of personal identity in
Section 1.4.6 is both radically subversive of standard views and —notoriously —later
confessed to be inadequate in the 1740 Appendix published with Treatise Book 3.¹³
There Hume admits his inability to renounce or render consistent the principles that
underlie his position (T App. 21), and although the precise nature of his dif ﬁculty is
radically unclear, there is no doubt that here, at least, his sceptical arguments havebecome seriously corrosive of his own philosophy.
¹² This pamphlet (or possibly manuscript, since we know its form and content only from Hume ’s
quotation of it) was composed to undermine Hume ’s candidacy for the Chair of Ethics and Pneumatical
Philosophy at Edinburgh, which could suggest strong prudential reasons for the later toning down of his
scepticism, both epistemological and moral (the ﬁnal major charge accused the Treatise of“sapping the
Foundations of Morality ”). But in fact, as we shall see, there is plenty of evidence that Hume ’s modiﬁ ca-
tions in this direction had a solid philosophical motivation, and his highly critical treatment of religioustopics in the Enquiries seems to indicate that prudential caution was a relatively minor consideration in
their composition.
¹³ At T App.10, Hume apparently alludes to T 1.4.5.1 in mentioning his earlier “hopes, that however
deﬁcient our theory of the intellectual world might be, it wou ’d be free from those contradictions, and
absurdities, which seem to attend every explication, that human reason can give of the material world. ”OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
  
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
TheﬁrstEnquiry ’s treatment of scepticism is very different, both in tone and
content. Initially it is more overt in its sceptical nature, for example in the title given
to the foundational Section 4 which expounds at length Hume ’s“Sceptical doubts
concerning the operations of the understanding. ”But he later devotes the concluding
Section 12 to spelling out his considered attitude to this and other sceptical argu-ments, rejecting their more extreme or “Pyrrhonian ”consequences and embracing
instead “a more mitigated scepticism or academical philosophy ”(EHU 12.24). Most
importantly, there is little trace in the ﬁrstEnquiry of the corrosive scepticism that so
bedevilled the end of Treatise Book 1. In particular, the argument of “scepticism with
regard to reason ”is entirely dropped, and Hume seems implicitly to dismiss the kind
of reﬂexive doubts that underlie it when he attacks “antecedent” scepticism at EHU
12.3. “Scepticism with regard to the senses ”is still represented, but toned down by
omitting any worries about the supposed incoherence of a changing object retainingits identity through time, and also by Hume ’s statement that “It is a question of fact,
whether the perceptions of the senses be produced by external objects, resemblingthem ”(EHU 12.12), implying that he sees no contradiction in the belief in body
(though at EHU 12.15 he still ﬁnds the primary/secondary quality distinction
seriously problematic). Personal identity is not discussed in the Enquiry , but both
Hume ’s apparently more relaxed view of identity over time, and his omission of the
Separability Principle —a major source of the implausible metaphysics of Treatise
1.4.5 –6—suggest that this could now be less of a problem for him.¹ ⁴Assessing how
far these changes are merely cosmetic, and how far they indicate a fundamentalchange in Hume ’s position, is unsurprisingly controversial, since he himself does not
give any very clear assessment of the matter.¹ ⁵Personally I do see fundamental
change, but for present purposes we can put this question aside, and simply focuson the presentational issue which is very clear indeed: the ﬁrstEnquiry seems to have
been intended, at least in part, to dispel the impression of Hume’ s epistemology and
metaphysics given by Treatise Book 1, as being overwhelmingly negative and
sceptical.
. The Egoist Foundations of the Treatise
Treatise Books 2 and 3 are sceptical in a different way, presenting a picture of moral
motivation that is primarily egoist and hedonist, thus precluding any more nobleaccount of morality. Here Hume follows in the footsteps of John Locke, who wrotethat “happiness and that alone . . . moves desire ”(Essay II xxi 41), understanding
happiness itself in terms of pleasure. Accordingly, “what has an aptness to produce
Pleasure in us, is that we call Good , and what is apt to produce Pain in us, we call Evil,
for no other reason, but for its aptness to produce Pleasure and Pain in us, wherein
consists our Happiness andMisery ”(Essay II xxi 42).
¹⁴The Separability Principle is stated most fully at T 1.1.7.3, and applied at T 1.4.5.5 and 1.4.6.3, for
example.
¹⁵Though Hume famously renounced the Treatise in favour of the ﬁrstEnquiry on numerous
occasions, both in private letters and publicly (cf. §9 below), his words in doing so are open to varying
interpretations.OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
    ’    
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
The hedonism of the Treatise —expressed in terms reminiscent of Locke —is very
evident in Hume ’s theory of what he calls the direct passions. Explicitly and repeat-
edly, he equates good with pleasure , and evil with pain (e.g. T 2.1.1.4, 2.3.1.1,
2.3.9.1 –8), explaining our motivation accordingly:
’Tisobvious , that when we have the prospect of pain or pleasure from any object, we feel a
consequent emotion of aversion or propensity, . . . And these emotions extend themselves to
the causes and effects of that object, as they are pointed out to us by reason and experience.
(T 2.3.3.3, emphasis added)
’Tis easy to observe, that the passions, both direct and indirect, are founded on pain and
pleasure . . . Upon the removal of pain and pleasure there immediately follows a removal of loveand hatred, pride and humility, desire and aversion, and of most of our re ﬂective or secondary
impressions. (T 2.3.9.1)
Hume ’s account here seems to be egoist as well as hedonist, for although “pain or
pleasure ”could in principle refer to somebody else ’spain or pleasure, it is our own
that is commonly thought to have the “obvious ”and intimate connection with
motivation that he is clearly assuming, such that “Upon [their] removal . . . there
immediately follows a removal of . . . desire and aversion. ”¹⁶
This claim that the Treatise is fundamentally egoist is, however, controversial,
attracting both supporters and opponents.¹ ⁷Those insisting that “Hume is no egoist ”
(verbatim ) include Michael Gill, who appeals to Hume’ s belief “that humans possess
‘natural ’virtues, many of which are inherently sociable ”;¹⁸Don Garrett, who points
out that “the operation of sympathy guarantees that human beings are concerned for
the pleasures and pains of others as well as their own” ;¹⁹and David Owens, who says
Hume “allows that human beings care for family and friends as well as for themselves
[T 3.2.2.5]. ”²⁰We can quickly address the ﬁrst two of these points —on natural virtues
and sympathy —but the third will require more detailed consideration.
¹⁶See also T 1.3.10.2, which seems clearly to have our own “pain and pleasure ”in mind when describing
these as our “chief spring and moving principle ”. The same intimate connection with motivation is clearly
asserted by Locke: if the “perception of Delight ”that God “has been pleased to join ”to various of our
thoughts and sensations “were wholly separated from all our outward Sensations, and inward Thoughts, we
should have no reason to prefer one Thought or Action, to another; . . . And so we should neither stir our
Bodies, nor employ our Minds ”; see John Locke, An Essay Concerning Human Understanding , ed.
P. H. Nidditch (Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1975 [1690/1700]), II vii 3 (the following section extends thesame point to pain). Locke was himself following Thomas Hobbes, who identi ﬁeddelight with pleasure
(Leviathan I vi 11) and was explicitly egoist: “of all voluntary acts, the object is to every man his own good ”
(Leviathan I xv 16); Leviathan: or, The matter, forme, & power of a common-wealth ecclesiasticall and civill
(London, 1651).
¹⁷Other supporters include Rachel Cohon, Hume ’s Morality: Feeling and Fabrication (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2008), see pp. 31 –5; Stephen Darwall, “Motive and Obligation in Hume ’s Ethics. ”Noûs27
(1993): 423; and Mikael M. Karlsson, “Reason, Passion, and the In ﬂuencing Motives of the Will. ”InThe
Blackwell Guide to Hume ’s Treatise , ed. Saul Traiger (Oxford: Blackwell Publishing Co., 2006), pp. 246 –7.
¹⁸Michael Gill, “Hume ’s Progressive View of Human Nature. ”Hume Studies 26 (2000): 87 –108: 90.
¹⁹Don Garrett, Hume (Abingdon: Routledge, 2015), p. 114. Garrett ’s sentence continues “. . . , and he
recognize s 
other basic instinctual desires and aversions besides the desire for pleasure and aversion to
pain. ”This important additional point will also be addressed below.
²⁰David Owens, “The Problem of Promising. ”InPromises and Agreements: Philosophical Essays , ed.
Hanoch Scheinman (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2011), p. 72.OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
  
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
Hume does indeed recognize “sociable ”natural virtues in the Treatise , but his
explanation of them ﬁts well with egoism, for it is based on reducing concern about
society to concern about ourselves:
we have no . . . extensive concern for society but from sympathy; and consequently ’tis that
principle, which takes us so far out of ourselves, as to give us the same pleasure or uneasiness in
characters which are useful or pernicious to society, as if they had a tendency to our own
advantage or loss. (T 3.3.1.11)
The effect of Humean sympathy is to replicate other people ’s perceived emotions in
our own: when we see someone happy or sad, the operation of sympathy makes us
feel a similar happiness or sadness. Sympathy thus makes us care about otherpeople ’s pain or pleasure because these are causes ofour own pain or pleasure (cf.
T 2.3.3.3 above). But without the underlying assumption of egoism, this mechanism
could be unnecessary: the prospect of others ’pain or pleasure might motivate us
directly (as Francis Hutcheson, for example, maintained), without ﬁrst requiring that
they be echoed in our own ﬁrst-personal feelings through the operation of sympathy.
Hence Hume ’s emphasis on sympathy as a central mechanism of the moral theory of
theTreatise , so far from telling against the suggestion that this theory is fundamen-
tally egoist, actually tells signi ﬁcantly in its favour.²¹
The Treatise does, however, acknowledge what looks like a notable anti-egoist
exception, in that —as we saw Owens observing —we naturally feel benevolence
towards those we love, and “anger” towards those we hate: “Love is always follow ’d
by a desire of the happiness of the person belov ’d, and an aversion to his misery: As
hatred produces a desire of the misery and an aversion to the happiness of the person
hated. ”(T 2.2.6.3).²² So marked is this tendency that the passions of love and
benevolence naturally blend together ,“forming a compound ”and generating a
“uniform impression ”(T 2.2.6.1). The same is true of hatred and anger. Conceptu-
ally, however, they remain distinct, and Hume himself seems to recognize that theirassociation constitutes a departure from egoism, for he later remarks that resentment
²¹ A different view is suggested by E. B. McGilvary, “Altruism in Hume ’s Treatise. ”Philosophical Review
(1903): 291 –4 and John Bricke, Mind and Morality: An Examination of Hume ’s Moral Psychology (Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 1996), pp. 129 –35. They insist that Humean sympathy can communicate others ’
desires as well as pleasures or pains, thus potentially giving me a desire for another ’s well-being unmediated
by my own pleasure and pain. Some of Hume ’s text indeed gives this impression, as when he talks about the
sympathetic communication of “inclinations and sentiments ”or“opinions and affections ”(T 2.1.11.2, 7).
These terms are vague, and could potentially cover many things, but in practice, Hume ’s explanations
almost always seem to be in terms of the communication of pleasures and pains, and McGilvary is simply
mistaken in claiming that “Hume accounts for pity [as] sympathy with another ’s pain or with his desire to
rid himself of that pain ”(p. 291, echoed by Bricke, p. 129). Hume ’s actual treatment of pity at Treatise
2.2.7.2 –5 talks of “afﬂiction and sorrow ”being communicated by sympathy, not desire (and likewise the
1757 Dissertation says “compassion is an uneasiness in the sufferings of another, ”DP 3.7, emphasis added).
For more on this, see Amyas Merivale ’s excellent and groundbreaking recent study of Hume ’s mature
theory of the passions, Hume on Art, Emotion, and Superstition: A Critical Study of the Four Dissertations
(Abingdon: Routledge, 2019), pp. 58 –9.
²² The apparent contradiction between benevolence and egoism is not quite as straightforward as it
might seem, however, since as Merivale points out (Hume on Art, Emotion, and Superstition , pp. 64 –5),
Hume at T 2.2.9.15 describes benevolence as “an original pleasure arising from the pleasure of the person
belov ’d,”thus providing a potential egoist explanation of benevolent behaviour.OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
    ’    
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
against someone who injures me “often . . . makes me desire his evil and punishment,
independent of all considerations of pleasure and advantage to myself ”(T 2.3.3.9,
emphasis added).
It seems fairly clear, then, that in respect of benevolence and hatred at least, the
Treatise is not consistently egoist, and the question is whether this exception is
sufﬁcient to undermine my claim that it is fundamentally egoist. Potentially signi ﬁ-
cant contextual evidence here is given by the paragraph immediately preceding the
quotation above:
...Ibegin to be sensible ...o fa misfortune, that has attended every system of philosophy, with
which the world has been yet acquainted. ’Tis commonly found, that in accounting for the
operations of nature by any particular hypothesis; . . . there is always some phaenomenon,
which is more stubborn, . . . the dif ﬁculty, which I have at present in my eye, is no-wise contrary
to my system; but only departs a little from that simplicity, which has been hitherto its
principal force and beauty. (T 2.2.6.2)
The rest of the section is devoted to arguing a theoretical point, that our tendency
towards benevolence and anger, proportioned to our love and hatred rather than toany egoistic calculation, must be generated “by the original constitution of the mind ”
(T 2.2.6.6). It cannot apparently be accounted for by sympathy,²³ and “abstractedly
consider’ d,”there is no necessity to our minds ’working in this way. It is therefore just
a brute fact of human nature; one that Hume apparently sees as being inconvenientlyout of line with his general theory.
The remarkable passage at T 2.2.6.2 is surprisingly little discussed in the literature,
and its signi ﬁcance is debatable.² ⁴Read most naturally, however, Hume is expressing
disappointment at the complication of his theory from having to add “original ”and
“unaccountable ”principles connecting love with benevolence and hatred with anger
(T 2.2.6.6, 2.3.9.8). One plausible explanation for such disappointment would be thathe has hitherto been attempting to build his account on a simple egoist basis, a
suggestion circumstantially supported by the striking fact that the inconsistency
between egoism and benevolence provides the focus of the only other topic-speci ﬁc
references to theoretical “simplicity ”in Hume ’s entire philosophical corpus (at EPM
²³ Given the reluctance with which Hume acknowledges this complication in his theory, his failure even
to consider whether it might be explicable through the sympathetic communication of others ’desires
counts against McGilvary and Bricke ’s thesis that Humean sympathy can operate in that way, especially
since sympathy is immediately invoked in the following section to explain pityandmalice in cases where
there is no “friendship or enmity to occasion this concern or joy ”(T 2.2.7.1 –2).
²⁴P. J. E. Kail, Projection and Realism in Hume ’s Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007)
sees the dif ﬁculty as being that “two impressions can merge to produce another ”(p. 141). But Hume
expresses his worry as arising after he has explained blending, when he turns to examine “those ingredients,
which are capable of uniting with love and hatred. ”Moreover so far from being an unfortunate compli-
cation, the blending of emotions turns out to be an important unifying feature of his theory which explains
hope and fear on a close analogy with his theory of probability (T 2.3.9.9 –17; DP 1.7 –10). John Passmore,
Hume ’s Intentions (London: Duckworth, 1980) instead suggests that Hume ’s anxiety concerns his desire
“to show ...a precise parallel between love and pride, between hate and humility ”(p. 127). Hume does
indeed remark on the difference between these pairs (T 2.2.6.3), but without any obvious concern about theasymmetry, and this is not the main focus of the section.OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
  
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
App 2.6 –7, 12).² ⁵If this suggestion is correct, then the incompatibility of his account
of benevolence with pure egoism serves to conﬁ rm, rather than undermine, the
straightforward view that the theory of the Treatise starts from an egoist basis.
Having recognized benevolence and anger as exceptions to his general theory,
Hume seems to have edited his account of the direct passions to reﬂ ect this, though
apparently rather clumsily:
Beside good and evil, or in other words, pain and pleasure, the direct passions frequently arise
from a natural impulse or instinct, which is perfectly unaccountable. Of this kind is the desireof punishment to our enemies, and of happiness to our friends; hunger, lust, and a few otherbodily appetites. These passions, properly speaking, produce good and evil, and proceed not
from them, like the other affections. (T 2.3.9.8)
This passage starts with a bald assertion of hedonism —that “good ”and “evil”are to
be identi ﬁed with “pleasure ”and “pain ”respectively —but then goes on to observe
that we sometimes desire other things owing to an “unaccountable ”natural instinct
(presumably alluding here to the discussion at T 2.2.6 that we have just examined).
These instinctive desires can “produce good and evil ”(i.e. pleasure and pain),
presumably through the satisfaction or frustration that we experience when theyare ful ﬁlled or fail. But such an account is strained: an expectation of pleasure and
pain is not essential to these desires (e.g. we can strive towards a future goal —such as
the eventual defeat of an invading enemy —whose ful ﬁlment we do not expect to see),
and indeed if such an expectation were essential, then they would not be “perfectly
unaccountable. ”So recognizing these “unaccountable ”desires is in serious tension
with the crude hedonism of treating “pleasure ”and “pain ”as“other words ”for good
and evil.
The passage just quoted acknowledges that we have a natural instinct not only to
desire “punishment to our enemies ”and “happiness to our friends, ”but also “hunger,
lust, and a few other bodily appetites. ”It is tempting to speculate that Hume’ s
acknowledgement of these further instincts was prompted by his work onSection 2.2.11 of the Treatise ,“Of the amorous passion, or love betwixt the sexes, ”
which recognizes the phenomenon of bodily appetite , and describes hunger as a
“primary inclination of the soul ”(T 2.2.11.3). The absence of parental affection from
the list may seem surprising, given Hume ’sstatement in the immediately following
section
that “The affection of parents to their young proceeds from a peculiar instinct
in animals, as well as in our species ”(T 2.2.12.5).² ⁶But the isolation of this
statement —as a paragraph in itself —rather suggests that it was a last-minute inser-
tion. Hume ’s initial explanation of such affection at T 2.2.4.2 had subsumed it under
²⁵In §6 below, the relevant passages are quoted from EPM 2.6 and 2.12 in the original 1751 edition.
More general comments on theoretical “simplicity ”are at T 1.3.16.3 and EHU 4.12 (cf. T 2.1.3.6 –7, 3.1.2.6;
A 1; EPM 1.10). Hume does elsewhere remark on how some of his own theories are simple (e.g. T 2.1.12.1;
EPM 5.45, 9.1), particularly when emphasising their ease of application to the thoughts and feelings ofanimals (e.g. T 2.1.12.9, 2.2.12.1, cf. 1.3.16.8).
²⁶This section “Of the love and hatred of animals ”also notes that animals —like humans —feel affection
or enmity according to how they are treated (T 2.2.12.3). The analogy between animals and humans is a
strong theme in Hume ’s thought, both in the Treatise and the two Enquiries (cf. also T 1.3.16, 2.1.12,
2.3.9.32, EHU 9, EPM App. 2.8 –9, 13).OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
    ’    
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
his general account “of the love of relations” owing to closeness of connexion, so
there is clear evidence of development in his view here.² ⁷When he later describes the
“calm passions ”that result from original instincts, he lists “the love of life, and
kindness to children ”alongside “benevolence and resentment ”(T 2.3.3.8).² ⁸But
nowhere in the Treatise do we ﬁnd Hume systematically bringing together these
various lists (presumably a symptom of the hasty publication that he later regretted).
We must look to the second Enquiry for the most comprehensive catalogue, citing
“hunger, thirst, and other appetites, resentment, love of life, attachment to offspring,
and other passions ”as all arising “from a simple original instinct in the human
breast, which nature has implanted for like salutary purposes” (EPM 3.40). But by
then, as we shall see, Hume had completely abandoned the initial egoism of the
Treatise .
. Rejecting Moral Scepticism and Egoism
Although Hume himself displays no such subversive intention, it is not surprising
that the fundamentally secular and egoist theory of the Treatise was viewed by his
critics as being seriously dangerous to morality. The hostile 1745 pamphlet men-tioned in §4 above charged him “With sapping the Foundations of Morality, by
denying the natural and essential Difference betwixt Right and Wrong, Good andEvil, Justice and Injustice; making the Difference only arti ﬁcial, and to arise from
human Conventions and Compacts ”(LFG 19).² ⁹Prominent amongst the passages
cited to press this charge are one attributing the origin of justice to “the Sel ﬁshness
and con ﬁned Generosity of Men ”(LFG 10, cf. T 3.2.2.18) and another afﬁ rming “that
there is no such Passion in human Minds, as the Love of Mankind merely as such,
independent of personal Qualities, of Service or of Relation to ourself ”(LFG 10, cf.
T 3.2.1.12). Both have an obvious basis in the egoism of the Treatise and the limited
boundaries of Humean sympathy.³ ⁰
In stark contrast with the Treatise , the second Enquiry of 1751 highlights from the
start Hume’ s determination to repudiate any accusation of moral scepticism or
egoism. In the ﬁrst two paragraphs of Section 1, he insists that “Those who have
refused the Reality of moral Distinctions . . . really do not believe at all the Opinionthey defend ”(1751, 1.1 –2). Then Section 2 starts by outlining two types of egoist
²⁷The change was permanent, as shown by Essays 162– 3(“The Sceptic, ”para. 10), EPM 3.40, and DP
3.3, n. 4.
²⁸He also mentions a different form of calm passion, “the general appetite to good, and aversion to evil,
consider ’d merely as such,” though this leaves inexplicit what understanding of “good ”and “evil”he has in
mind here.
²⁹This may partly explain why the arti ﬁciality of justice —so prominent in the Treatise —is mentioned as
such just once in the second Enquiry , and merely in a footnote to an appendix (EPM App. 3.9, n. 64). But
see also note 45 below for a principled reason why the distinction between natural and arti ﬁcial virtues
becomes philosophically less signi ﬁcant in Hume ’s later moral theory.
³⁰The second Treatise passage continues “’Tis true, there is no human, and indeed no sensible, creature,
whose happiness or misery does not, in some measure, affect us, when brought near to us, and represented
in lively colours: But this proceeds merely from sympathy, and is no proof of such an universal affection to
mankind, . . . ”(T 3.2.1.12).OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
  
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
view, one (commonly associated with Mandeville) that cynically dismisses all would-
be moral concern as hypocrisy, and the other —less extreme —
much insisted on by Philosophers, . . . that whatever Affection one may feel, or imagine he feels
for others, no Passion is, or can be disinterested; that the most generous Friendship, however
sincere, is a Modi ﬁcation of Self-love; and, that even unknown to Ourselves, we seek only our
Grati ﬁcation, while we appear the most deeply engag ’d in Schemes for the Liberty and
Happiness of Mankind. (1751, 2.2).³¹
Hume includes Epicurus, Hobbes, and Locke amongst those professing this “selﬁsh
System of Morals ”(1751, 2.3), and goes on to explain how such a theory need not
imply a denial of “the Reality of moral Distinctions ”(which he has already dismissed
as incredible):
AEpicurean or a Hobbist readily allows, that there is such a Thing as Friendship in the
World, ...t h o ’he may attempt, by a philosophical Chymistry, to resolve the Elements of this
Passion . . . into those of another, and explain every Affection to be Self-love, twisted and
moulded into a Variety of . . . Appearances. But . . . even according to the sel ﬁsh System,...I
esteem the Man, whose Self-love ...i s s o directed as to give him a Concern for others, and
render him serviceable to Society: As I hate or despise him, who has no Regard to any Thingbeyond his own pitiful Grati ﬁcations and Enjoyments. In vain would you suggest, that these
Characters . . . are, at the Bottom, the same. (1751, 2.4)
Having thus observed that the status of the selﬁ sh hypothesis is “not so material, as is
usually imagin ’d, to Morality and Practice ”(1751, 2.5),³² Hume goes on nevertheless
to advance a battery of objections to it, some of which we have seen anticipated in the
Treatise .
The most obvious objection to the egoist theory is its mismatch with common
experience of human affections, many of which seem plainly unselﬁ sh, and have only
been supposed otherwise “from that Love of Simplicity , which has been the Source of
much false Reasoning in Philosophy” (1751, 2.6, cf. §5 above).³³ Other strong
considerations come from the analogy with animals, both their naïve kindnesswhich cannot plausibly be attributed to “reﬁn’d Deductions of Self-interest ”(2.8),
and the manifest “Tenderness to their Offspring ”observed “in all sensible Beings ”
(2.9), our own experience of which is again manifestly contrary to the selﬁ sh theory:
“What Interest can a fond Mother have in View, who loses her Health by assiduous
Attendance on her sick Child, and afterwards languishes, and dies for Grief, whenfreed, by its Death, from the Slavery of that Attendance? ”(1751, 2.9). Moving on to a
more fundamental objection, Hume observes that certain “bodily Wants or Appe-
tites, ”and also “mental passions” such as the desire for fame, power, or vengeance,
are directed immediately toward speci ﬁc objects, rather than involving a merely
³¹ This and the following quotations are taken from the 1751 ﬁrst edition of the second Enquiry , where
the discussion of egoism occupies Part 1 of Section 2. For the 1777 posthumous edition, Hume moved this
discussion into Appendix 2, which is where the ﬁnal versions of these passages are now to be found. The
text is largely unchanged (apart from capitalization), and the paragraph numbers correspond exactly.
³² An observation perhaps partly intended to acquit the Treatise of“sapping the Foundations of
Morality. ”
³³ Again, contrast this sceptical observation with the lament for lost simplicity at T 2.2.6.2, quoted in §5.OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
    ’    
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
indirect desire motivated by a quest for pleasure. In such cases, the directed desire
precedes— and its satisfaction explains—the pleasure, rather than the anticipated
pleasure generating the desire. Thus egoism puts the cart before the horse:
Nature must, by the internal Frame and Constitution of the Mind, give an original Propensity
to Fame, ’ere we can reap any Pleasure from it, or pursue it from . . . Self-love, and a Desire of
Happiness. If I have no Vanity, I take no Delight in Praise: If I be void of Ambition, Power gives
no Enjoyment: If I be not angry, the Punishment of an Adversary is totally indifferent to me.
(1751, 2.12)
Once this key point has been accepted —that we can, and do, directly desire some
things for themselves, rather than merely as means to pleasure —it becomes clear that
there is no “Difﬁculty of conceiving, that this may likewise be the Case with
Benevolence and Friendship, and that, from the original Frame of our Temper, we
may feel a Desire of another ’s Happiness or Good ”(1751, 2.13).³ ⁴Having broken the
spell of the egoist assumption that we can only be motivated by our own pleasure andpain, we are free to open our eyes to the obvious empirical evidence that we do in factdesire the good of others (most obviously family and friends), and not merely for
selﬁsh reasons. Indeed, from this perspective it becomes clear that “if we consider
rightly of the Matter, . . . the Hypothesis, which allows of a disinterested Benevolence,
distinct from Self-love, has really more Simplicity in it, and is more conformable to
the Analogy of Nature, than that which pretends to resolve all Friendship andHumanity into this latter Principle ”(1751, 2.12). Even theoretical simplicity ultim-
ately fails to tell in favour of the selﬁ sh theory, which has by now been comprehen-
sively refuted.
Although most of these objections can be seen as developing from points ﬁrst
made in the Treatise , it seems that Hume ’s decisive turn away from egoism had a
distinct and speci ﬁc inspiration which is identi ﬁed in the ﬁrstEnquiry (rather than
the second). A footnote appended to EHU 1.14 in the 1748 and 1750 editions clearlyacknowledges the “cart before the horse ”point above:
It has been prov ’d, beyond all Controversy, that even the Passions, commonly esteem ’d selﬁsh,
carry the Mind beyond Self, directly to the Object; that tho ’the Satisfaction of these Passions
gives us Enjoyment, yet the Prospect of this Enjoyment is not the Cause of the Passion, but on
the contrary the Passion is antecedent to the Enjoyment (1748, 1.14n.).
In the previous sentence there is a further note “SeeButler ’s Sermons, ”thus crediting
Joseph Butler with this point, and indeed the argument of his Sermon XI “Upon the
Love of our Neighbour ”has long been considered the classic refutation of naïve
egoism. Here we have strong evidence that reading Butler ultimately persuaded
Hume that egoism was not only wrong in detail but fundamentally misguided. Ifso, that reading had presumably occurred by the time he wrote the essay “Of the
Dignity or Meanness of Human Nature, ”published in 1741, which makes the same
³⁴Or indeed another ’s harm, in the case of “Vengeance, [which] may be so eagerly pursued, as to make
us knowingly neglect every Consideration of Ease, Interest or Safety ”(1751, 2.13). Note that this
discussion —focused on attacking egoism —has culminated in the same conceptual nexus as T 2.2.6.3,
again somewhat suggesting that Hume ’s theoretical anxiety at T 2.2.6.2 is itself associated with egoism.OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
  
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
key point.³ ⁵And it is even possible that a preliminary reading of the sermons prior to
1739 —perhaps stimulated by Hume’ s high opinion of Butler ’s 1736 Analogy of
Religion —lay behind the clumsily edited paragraph at T 2.3.9.8 which talks of natural
passions that “properly speaking, produce good and evil, and proceed not from them,
like the other affections. ”³⁶
However, this might be, it seems clear that once Hume had fully absorbed Butler ’s
point, he not only accepted it but reinforced it with further arguments, turning
completely against the initial egoism of the Treatise and thus switching sides on
one of the most central debates in moral philosophy. Having declared his position onthe matter clearly and prominently, at the beginning of Section 2 of his 1751 moralEnquiry (now Appendix 2), he removed from the ﬁrstEnquiry the footnote that
provides such a useful clue regarding a key source of this fundamental change ofmind.
. Sympathy, Humanity, and Associationist
Explanation
Hume ’s abandonment of egoism, not surprisingly, leaves signi ﬁcant traces in his
treatment of sympathy andhumanity , terms that are initially quite distinct but which
he ultimately blurs. In the Treatise , sympathy is an association-based mechanism
whereby the “inclinations and sentiments” of others are communicated to us
(T 2.1.11.2). Its explanatory basis is that our lively ideas of others ’“passions and
sentiments ”are close to impressions, and they can be enhanced through association
so that “the ideas of the affections of others are converted into the very impressions
they represent” (T 2.1.11.7 –8; cf. also 2.1.11.14 –18, 2.2.4.6-7, 2.3.6.8). This mechan-
ism of sympathy plays a huge role in Books 2 and 3 of the Treatise —being mentioned
in no fewer than eighty- ﬁve paragraphs —and amongst many other functions it
explains our “natural humanity ”or general concern for “the happiness of [our]
fellow-creatures ”(T 3.3.1.12). Any such humanity is imperfect and partial, for as
the author of the hostile 1745 pamphlet pointed out (see §6 above), Hume insists at
³⁵“The virtuous sentiment or passion produces the pleasure, and does not arise from it. I feel a pleasure
in doing good to my friend, because I love him; but do not love him for the sake of that pleasure. ”(E-DM,
85–6).
³⁶See Merivale, Hume on Art, Emotion, and Superstition , pp. 71 –2. This speculation from Merivale is
chronologically plausible. But it is unclear whether Hume ’s wording genuinely manifests a grasp of Butler ’s
“cart before the horse ”point (as the 1741 quotation in footnote 35 above somewhat corroborates), or is
instead a relatively ad hoc attempt to force the recalcitrant phenomena of benevolence, resentment, and
bodily appetites (whose independent recognition in the Treatise we have traced in §5 above) into the
theoretical framework of direct passions that are supposedly “founded on pain and pleasure ”(T 2.3.9.1).
Merivale ’s speculation also requires that Hume could have become dimly aware of Butler ’s point without
grasping it suf ﬁciently to appreciate its potentially devastating impact on the more fundamental egoism of
theTreatise . Though unconvinced on this particular issue, I should like to acknowledge with thanks many
discussions with Merivale that convinced me of a fundamental change in Hume ’s view, contrary to the
spirit of my paper “Hume on Ethics.” In Tom Angier ed., Key Thinkers: Ethics (London: Bloomsbury,
2012), which —while focusing mostly on the second Enquiry —stated that “The overall moral theory of the
two works is the same ”(p. 106) and cited the T 2.3.9.8 paragraph as evidence that even in the Treatise ,
“Hume is no psychological egoist ”(p. 128, n. 29).OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
    ’    
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
T 3.2.1.12 “that there is no such passion in human minds, as the love of mankind,
merely as such, independent of personal qualities, of services, or of relation to
ourself. ”And our imperfect humanity, such as it is, plays no very signi ﬁcant role in
theTreatise , being mentioned in only seven paragraphs, apparently just one virtue
amongst others (T 3.3.1.24, 3.3.3.3 –4) and doubly unreliable as a moral criterion
since it is “often . . . contrary to the laws of justice ”(T 3.3.1.12).
In the second Enquiry , by contrast, “sympathy ”is mentioned in only twenty-two
paragraphs, and the term seems generally to be used in a more everyday sense —for a
sentiment of fellow-feeling rather than a mechanism —and independently of the
speciﬁc theory of the Treatise . Only the following passage comes close to speaking
of the literal vivacity transfer characteristic of that theory:³ ⁷“Bring . . . virtue nearer,
by our acquaintance or connexion with the persons, or even by an eloquent recital ofthe case; our hearts are immediately caught, our sympathy enlivened, and our coolapprobation converted into the warmest sentiments of friendship and regard ”(EPM
5.43). Soon after, and elsewhere, “sympathy ”seems to be closely linked and even
virtually equated with “humanity, ”involving “not . . . any regards to self-interest,
b u t...a tendency to public good ”(EPM 5.45, cf. 9.12). Sometimes, indeed, they
seem to be identi ﬁed as a single sentiment (1751, 2.5n.; EPM 6.3). Moreover
“humanity ”now becomes the dominant term, mentioned in no fewer than 48
paragraphs of the second Enquiry .³⁸This stylometric change might be thought
merely presentational, given Hume ’s continuing emphasis in the central Section 5
(entitled “Why Utility Pleases ”) on feelings of a broadly sympathetic nature. But
there are at least three reasons to suggest that it runs much deeper, reﬂ ecting his
theoretical turn against egoism. First, where the Treatise had denied any “Love of
Mankind merely as such, ”Hume now speaks of “a generous concern for our kind and
species ”(EPM 2.5), “a warm concern for the interests of our species, ”“ageneral
appro
bation of what is useful to society, ”and “our natural philanthropy ”(EPM
5.39 –40). Secondly, in the Conclusion of the Enquiry (EPM 9.6 –9, cf. also 6.5), this
broad humanity is eulogized as the basis of moral sentiments and judgements, being“the same principle” in“all mankind ”and giving rise to “universal sentiments of
censure or approbation. ”³⁹It is these universal sentiments on which our language is
³⁷At EPM 7.2 and 7.21, Hume speaks of sympathy as a “contagion, ”which is suggestive of commu-
nication of emotion from one person to another, but silent regarding the mechanism. There are likewise
various other passages that are reminiscent of Hume ’s theory of sympathy from the Treatise , but none so
speciﬁc as to warrant any strong interpretative conclusions regarding how much of that theory he retained.
³⁸Thus, while paragraphs referring to “sympathy” decline by a factor of nearly four times from Treatise
Books 2 and 3 to the second Enquiry , those referring to “humanity ”multiply by a factor of very nearly
seven times. The Dissertation on the Passions , incidentally, includes only three paragraphs referring to
“sympathy ”(none to “humanity ”), with only one reminiscent of the speci ﬁc theory of the Treatise (DP 3.4,
cf. 2.33 and 3.11).
³⁹In the Treatise , Hume attempts to provide a mechanism for standardization of moral sentiments —
and thus reliable moral judgement —based on sympathy with the agent ’s“narrow circle ”of acquaintance
(T 3.3.3.2, cf. 3.3.1.18, 3.3.1.30). This may be the best he can do within a predominantly egoist theory, butas Jacqueline Taylor points out, it is morally inadequate, since such a narrow circle will commonly displaypartiality and prejudice. See Jacqueline Taylor, “Hume on the Standard of Virtue. ”The Journal of Ethics
(2002): 52 –6; and Reﬂecting Subjects: Passion, Sympathy, & Society in Hume ’s Philosophy (Oxford: Oxford
University Press, 2015), pp. 113– 16. Hume himself clearly recognizes this risk in his 1757 essay “Of the
Standard of Taste ”(paras 1, 11; E-ST, 226– 7, 233).OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
  
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
“moulded ”(EPM 9.8), thus establishing the linguistically agreed standard of moral
thought and communication from which the Enquiry ’s investigation began (at EPM
1.10). Thirdly, Hume explicitly contradicts the theoretical aspirations of his earlier
account, which as we saw above both explained (limited) humanity as arising from
sympathy, and attempted to explain sympathy itself, whereas now Hume dismissessuch attempts as unnecessary and probably futile:
It is needless to push our researches so far as to ask, why we have humanity or a fellow-feeling
with others .... W e must stop somewhere in our examination of causes; ...N o m a n i s
absolutely indifferent to the happiness and misery of others. The ﬁrst has a natural tendency
to give pleasure; the second, pain ....It is not probable, that these principles can be resolved into
principles more simple and universal, whatever attempts may have been made to that purpose.
(EPM 5.17, n. 19, emphasis added)
So an associationist explanation that had been postulated in the Treatise is disowned
in the second Enquiry , not just implicitly by omission, but through explicit denial.
Presumably this change reﬂ ects, at least in part, Hume’ s awareness that sympathy —
as interpreted in the Treatise —is unable to do the theoretical job required. ⁴⁰In the
Treatise , starting from an egoist foundation, he had based morality on sympathy and
argued (very reasonably) that this would be unable to ground any genuinely universal
humanity. Now in the Enquiry , he recognizes the manifest fact of universal humanity
(for example, in his own feelings), identi ﬁes this as the true basis of moral thought
and language, and consistently draws the conclusion that the mechanism of sym-pathy cannot provide the requisite basis for morals.
Although quite distinct from Hume’ s moral theory, there is a strikingly close
parallel to this last development —the abandonment of an associationist explanation
for good theoretical reasons —within the ﬁrstEnquiry . There, Sections 5 and 6 sketch
his theory of belief and probability as founded on custom, but seem signi ﬁcantly less
ambitious than the corresponding (and much more extensive) sections of the Trea-
tise. No attempt is now made to deﬁnebelief as the Treatise had done; indeed, the
possibility of any such de ﬁnition is explicitly denied (EHU 5.12, cf. T 1.3.7.5). In Part 2
of Section 5, Hume sets out modestly to ﬁnd“some explications and analogies, that
will give satisfaction, ”but he prefaces the discussion by remarking that it can be
entirely ignored by “readers of a different taste ”since “the following enquiries may
well be understood, though it be neglected ”(EHU 5.9). Its upshot is the relatively
vague claim that “belief, where it reaches beyond the memory or senses, is of a similar
nature, and arises from similar causes, with the transition of thought and vivacity ”
that characterizes association of ideas —we thus have “some analogies, by which
[belief] may be explained ”(EHU 5.20). All this is in contrast, especially as applied to
⁴⁰See also EPM 6.3, which argues that sympathetic identi ﬁcation cannot explain our approval of
qualities useful to another person by attempting to reduce this to “self-love ,”and EPM 5.13, which describes
as a “weak subterfuge ”the appeal to imaginative identi ﬁcation with “distant ages and countries. ”If the
interpretation above is correct —that such reductive explanation was precisely the intended role of
sympathy in the Treatise —then these paragraphs may amount to an explicit renunciation of that account,
replacing it with “a quite different principle, which . . . interests us in the felicity of the person whom we
contemplate” (EPM 6.3). Hume ends this paragraph talking of “a pleasing sentiment of sympathy and
humanity, ”but this cannot be sympathy as understood in the Treatise .OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
    ’    
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
probability, with the more literally hydraulic Treatise account, in which force and
vivacity seem to be conveyed from the initial “impulse ”given by the relevant impres-
sion either to the believed idea (T 1.3.8.2) or to be divided amongst the various
associated ideas (before potentially being recombined according to the similarity of
the outcomes, as at T 1.3.11.12 and 1.3.12.10 –11). Indeed, the Enquiry explicitly shuns
any attempt to explain the precise mechanism, talking of “an inexplicable contrivance
of nature ”(EHU 6.3). And the Appendix to the Treatise indicates that even in 1740
Hume already had serious doubts about his earlier theory: the inserted paragraphT 1.3.7.7, and App. 2 –9, pre ﬁgure the discussion in the Enquiry which inherits text
from them. In other respects, also, the Enquiry account manifests positive development
rather than mere abridgement: for example, in contrast to the corresponding discus-
sions in the Treatise (T 1.3.8 and 1.3.9), Hume is careful at EHU 5.18 –20 to distinguish
quite clearly between association of ideas through the relation of causation (e.g. I see a
picture and think of its painter) and customary inference (e.g. I see a ﬁre and infer that
it will be hot). The latter is analogous to association, but is not straightforwardly an
instance of it.
It is a familiar observation that the recast versions of the Treatise —the two
Enquiries and the Dissertation on the Passions— are more elegantly written and less
densely systematic than the original, treating issues without attempting to place themall within a comprehensive account of the mind. It is tempting to link these stylistic
and systematic changes: to assume that the omission of theoretical detail is primarilyfor presentational reasons —to provide a more attractive and popular exposition —
rather than representing any signi ﬁcant change of view. But in the two cases we have
brieﬂy discussed here, as with his more fundamental sceptical concerns, we can trace
a convincing philosophical source of Hume ’s dissatisfaction with his earlier view: in
the case of belief, through the reservations apparent in the 1740 Appendix ; and in the
case of sympathy and humanity, through the various texts that reveal his increasing
realization that general human benevolence is genuine and not merely an artefact of
reﬁned self-interest. This is not the place to argue the point in detail, but my own
view is that in most other cases too, the development from the Treatise to the
Enquiries represents philosophical progress and is rarely a matter of mere abridg-
ment. ⁴¹ When Hume omits earlier material, he usually does so for very good reason.
He also, of course, reworks much of the material he preserves, and here too —as we
have already seen and will soon see further —there are clear indications of philo-
sophical as well as stylistic change.
. Causation and Morality: Methodology,
Deﬁnitions, “Projection ”
We come ﬁnally to examine a particularly interesting —but controversial —
philosophical link between the two Enquiries , concerning the relationship between
⁴¹ Regarding the Dissertation on the Passions , see Amyas Merivale, “Hume ’s Mature Account of the
Indirect Passions. ”Hume Studies 35 (2009): 185 –210 and Hume on Art, Emotion and Superstition .
Merivale demonstrates that even the Dissertation , which is commonly thought of as a lightweight summary
ofTreatise Book 2, displays signi ﬁcant philosophical development and improvement.OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
  
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
Hume ’s causal metaphysics (as developed in Section 7 of the ﬁrstEnquiry and
applied to the question of liberty and necessity in Section 8), and his moral meta-
physics (as addressed in Sections 1 and 9 of the second Enquiry , but especially
Appendix 1). There are parallels between Hume’ s discussions of these issues at
various expository and methodological levels, but not all of these are straightforwardor obviously intentional. Starting at the level of super ﬁcial presentation, we see the
rhetoric of reconciliation —between liberty and necessity, and between the claims of
reason and sentiment—as already discussed in §3 above. Hume ’s route to reconcili-
ation in each case involves focusing on the relevant language and terms, on whichbasis he claims to ﬁnd underlying agreement amongst all parties once matters are
correctly understood (EHU 8.3; EPM 1.10). In the second Enquiry , Hume goes on to
explain that by building his theory on a catalogue of virtues and vices as manifestedempirically in our language and the attitudes it enshrines—“ a question of fact, not of
abstract science ”—he is “following the experimental method, and deducing general
maxims from a comparison of particular instances. ”⁴² His aim is “to discover the
circumstances on both sides, which are common ”to the relevant qualities, those “in
which the estimable qualities agree on the one hand, and the blameable on the other;and thence to reach the foundation of ethics, and ﬁnd those universal principles,
from which all censure or approbation is ultimately derived. ”⁴³ Hume ’s enthusiasm
for the experimental method here might perhaps intend some contrast with theaprioristic argument of Treatise 2.3.3.5 and 3.1.1.9 (brie ﬂy discussed in §3 above),
which seems to draw its conclusion from “a general abstract principle, ”a method
which Hume now remarks “is a common source of illusion and mistake ”(EPM 1.10).
But the Treatise had advertised itself (in its subtitle) as “an attempt to introduce the
experimental method of reasoning into moral subjects, ”so in this respect we have at
most a correction rather than a fundamental change of course. As one might expect,theﬁrstEnquiry —with its very explicit distinction between relations of ideas and
matters of fact —places moral investigation in the latter category, as requiring empir-
ical study of such facts as “the general taste of mankind ”(EHU 12.33). Perhaps when
he wrote this Hume had already envisaged the compilation of his catalogue of virtuesand vices, using language as his guide. If so, then again we ﬁnd in the ﬁrstEnquiry a
clue regarding
the development of his moral theory between the Treatise and the
second Enquiry .
The deepest methodological parallel between Hume’ s treatment of necessity in
theﬁrstEnquiry , and morality in the second, involves his appeal to de ﬁnition,
and in particular, his distinctive use of paired deﬁnitions. The two de ﬁnitions of
cause at EHU 7.29 are very familiar, although their interpretation is notoriously
⁴² See also EPM App. 1.10, in which Hume emphasizes that his method is “to examine a plain matter of
fact, to wit, what actions have this in ﬂuence ”[of eliciting approval or disapproval].
⁴³ Hume ’s method of appeal to linguistic consensus is more problematic than he seems to realize here,
since agreement on the colouring of moral terms can hide disagreement regarding their appropriate
application, e.g. one person ’s“courage ”might be another ’s“rashness. ”See my “Hume on Ethics, ”
pp. 109– 12 for more on this, and note Hume ’s later apparent appreciation of this point in the ﬁrstﬁve
paragraphs of his 1757 essay “Of the Standard of Taste. ”OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
    ’    
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
controversial. ⁴⁴Hume ’s main motive for uncovering these de ﬁnitions is revealed in
Section 8, where they provide the key to understanding the notion of necessity and
thus defending “the doctrine of necessity ”in the human sphere (EHU 8.5, 8.27). In
the second Enquiry (but not in the Treatise ), Hume provides two de ﬁnitions of
“personal merit ”or“virtue, ”though these occur in different places rather than
explicitly paired. ⁴⁵Ordering these to match with the two de ﬁnitions of cause, the
“second ”deﬁnition (EPM 8.0, n. 50, App. 1.10) focuses on the mental phenomenon
that uni ﬁes and confers signi ﬁcance on the relevant circumstances (in the case of
causal necessity, this is the customary inference of the mind ; in the case of virtue, the
sentiment of approbation ). The ﬁrst de ﬁnition (EPM 9.1, 9.12) is derived from the
second by discovering what is common to those circumstances —what observations
do in fact generate the mental phenomenon in question (in the case of causal necessity,
this is the observation of constant conjunction ). The methodological route from the
second de ﬁnition to the ﬁrst is spelled out in the following passage:
[Our hypothesis] ...d e ﬁnes virtue to be whatever mental action or quality gives to a spectator
the pleasing sentiment of approbation ; and vice the contrary. We then proceed to examine a
plain matter of fact, to wit, what actions have this in ﬂuence: We consider all the circumstances,
in which these actions agree: And thence endeavour to extract some general observations with
regard to these sentiments. (EPM App. 1.10)
The resulting “general observations” are, of course, encapsulated in the ﬁrst“delin-
eation or de ﬁnition of   ”:“every quality of the mind, which is useful
oragreeable to the person himself or to others , communicates a pleasure to the
spectator, engages his esteem, and is admitted under the honourable denomination
of virtue or merit” (EPM 9.12).
Much of the controversy over Hume ’s two de ﬁnitions of cause arises from the
mismatch between them: some constant conjunctions are never observed (and hencegive rise to no inference of the mind); some causal inferences are made in
⁴⁴A useful summary of the issues and the variety of scholarly views is given by Don Garrett, Cognition
and Commitment in Hume ’s Philosophy , (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997), pp. 96 –101. For my
own preferred account, see Peter Millican, “Hume, Causal Realism, and Causal Science. ”Mind 118 (2009):
647–712 and especially §4 (but with the caveat expressed in note 52 below), and Hume on Causation and
Free Will (Oxford: Oxford University Press, expected 2021 –22).
⁴⁵The nearest parallel in the Treatise is at T 3.3.1.30, where Hume offers “a general review of the present
hypothesis [concerning natural virtues and vices]: Every quality of the mind is denominated virtuous ,
which gives pleasure by the mere survey . . . This pleasure . . . may arise from four different sources. For we
reap a pleasure from the view of a character, which is naturally ﬁtted to be useful to others, or to the person
himself, or which is agreeable to others, or to the person himself. ”He goes on to stress the importance of
“some common point of view ...i n judging of characters, ”which turns out to be founded on sympathy
with what T 3.3.3.2 will call the “narrow circle ”of the agent ’s acquaintance (cf. note 39 above). But perhaps
because he is looking for an account that can yield (indirectly self-interested) motivation via sympathet-ically induced impressions, Hume seems not to have realized at this stage that the four criteria can beapplied more globally —and used as a de ﬁnitional standard for the correction of moral judgements —since
their satisfaction potentially provides an objective basis which escapes from the need for genuine sympa-thetic engagement (such as might indeed plausibly be limited to such a narrow circle). This move alsoenables integration between Hume ’s treatment of the “natural ”and “artiﬁcial”virtues, since both then turn
out to be answerable to the same general criteria. So here again we see signi ﬁcant and systematic changes in
Hume ’s moral theory, consequent on his crucial transition away from egoism and towards acknowledge-
ment of a broad “humanity. ”OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
  
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
circumstances that do not correspond to any genuine constant conjunction. The
parallel with his two de ﬁnitions of virtue provides valuable illumination here, because
there is a famous passage in the second Enquiry where Hume explicitly faces up to a
situation in which those two de ﬁnitions come apart. Many people approve of
“monkish virtues” such as celibacy, fasting, penance, morti ﬁcation, self-denial,
humility, silence, and solitude. But these all fail the test of Hume ’sﬁrst de ﬁnition,
and so he advocates classifying them instead as vices (EPM 9.3). In other words,having derived his “general observations” regarding the circumstances that stand-
ardly generate approbation in the spectator, Hume advocates revising our sensitivity
and judgements of approbation in such a way as to conform to those general rules.Hisﬁrst de ﬁnition of “personal merit, ”once it has been derived, thus comes to
overrule the second, ⁴⁶a pattern that indeed seems to hold also in respect of causation,
where Hume repeatedly treats constant conjunction as the key criterion (e.g.T 1.3.15.1, 1.4.5.32) and even as “the very essence ”of causal necessity (T 1.3.14.16,
1.4.5.33, 2.3.1.10, 2.3.2.2; EHU 8.22n., 8.25n.).
Moving now from methodology to metaphysics, Hume ’s theories of causation and
morality are often said to involve “projection,” in that causal and moral judgements
attribute to objects or events properties whose nature is fundamentally mental ormind-derived. The two passages most commonly quoted in this connection are
T 1.3.14.25, which observes that “the mind has a great propensity to spread itself
on external objects, ”and EPM App. 1.21, which says that moral taste “has a
productive faculty, and gilding or staining all natural objects with the colours,
borrowed from internal sentiment, raises, in a manner, a new creation.” But putting
these two passages together as exemplifying some consistent form of “Humean
projection ”is very questionable, for Hume ’s own attitude to them seems to be
quite different. The sentence before the Treatise passage —“This contrary biass is
easily accounted for ”—makes clear that he is here explaining away an erroneous
objection to his theory of necessary connexion, rather than presenting a positive“projectivist ”account. ⁴⁷In so far as people “project” their inferential “feeling ”onto
objects, he
sees them as making an error which biases them against accepting his
correct account. The ﬁrstEnquiry likewise treats as erroneous any tendency that we
might have to “transfer ...t ot h e objects ”an internal feeling such as the “sentiment of
anisus or endeavour, ”which “enters very much into [the] vulgar, inaccurate idea ”of
power (EHU 7.15, n.13, 7.29, n. 17). ⁴⁸This deprecation of causal “projection ”
contrasts with the passage about moral taste in the second Enquiry , which appears
⁴⁶Yet again we ﬁnd a contrast with the Treatise , which says: “The distinction of moral good and evil is
founded on the pleasure or pain, which results from the view of any sentiment, or character; and as that
pleasure or pain cannot be unknown to the person who feels it, it follows, that there is just so much vice orvirtue in any character, as every one places in it, and that ’tis impossible in this particular we can ever be
mistaken ”(T 3.2.8.8).
⁴⁷Likewise, the following sentences in T 1.3.14.25 make clear that such “projection ”is an error , compar-
able with attributing spatial location to sounds and smells (Hume alludes here to T 1.4.5.11 –14).
⁴⁸The latter footnote gets closest to T 1.3.14.25, saying that in the case of “energies, which are exerted,
without our annexing to them any idea of communicated motion ”(and which therefore involve no nisus ),
“we consider only the constant experienced conjunction of the events; and as we feel a customary
connexion between the ideas, we transfer that feeling to the objects; as nothing is more usual than toapply to external bodies every internal sensation, which they occasion. ”It is clear in the Enquiry that HumeOUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
    ’    
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
to endorse and celebrate its remarkable power to raise “a new creation ”through the
projection of “internal sentiment. ”
The difference in Hume ’s attitude here might seem puzzling, given the striking
similarities between his treatment of causation and of morality. In both cases we have
distinctive “impressions ”—of“power or necessary connexion ”(EHU 7.5 ff.) and
“approbation or blame ”(EPM App. 1.11) respectively. In both cases we have two
deﬁnitions, one referring explicitly to the occurrence of such impressions, the other
apparently aiming to systematize what is in common to the circumstances in whichthose impressions typically arise. In both cases we have a policy of conforming ourjudgements to the relevant systematized de ﬁnition, through procedures such as the
“rules by which to judge of causes and effects ”(T 1.3.15), “resolv[ing] the many
particular effects into a few general causes” (EHU 4.12), assessing consequences from
a“common point of view ”(T 3.3.1.30, EPM 9.6, cf. T 3.3.1.15), applying principles of
justice that are arti ﬁcially designed to foster “general utility ”(EPM App. 3.11; cf.
T 3.2.2.22; EPM 3.12, 3.47– 8), and so forth. Hume ’s description of the careful
analysis required for proper moral judgement could apply equally well to causaljudgement: “in order to . . . give a proper discernment of its object, it is often neces-
sary, we ﬁnd, that much reasoning should precede, that nice distinctions be made,
just conclusions drawn, distant comparisons formed, complicated relations exam-
ined, and general facts ﬁxed and ascertained ”(EPM 1.9). But in fact such similarity is
only to be expected, because Hume is here outlining the role of reason in moral
judgement, in the context of distinguishing it from the role of sentiment .⁴⁹As we saw
in §3 above, this explicit recognition of the key role of reason in morality involves a
signiﬁcant change —at least presentationally —from the Treatise . The second Enquiry
still seems keen to give sentiment a prominent role, in delivering the ﬁnal verdict
regarding “honour or infamy, approbation or censure ”(EPM 1.9), after reason has
established the facts of the case. Following this initial sketch of their respective roles,
Hume expresses the hope that his investigation will reveal “how far
 either sentiment
or reason enters into [moral] determinations ”(EPM 1.10). But by the end of the
Enquiry , it turns out that reason does nearly all of the work in establishing “the
tendency of qualities and actions ”(EPM App. 1.2), so almost the only task remaining
for our natural sentiment of humanity is to declare an obvious preference for theuseful and agreeable over their contraries: “Here, therefore, reason instructs us in the
several tendencies of actions, and humanity makes a distinction in favour of those,
which are useful and bene ﬁcial”(EPM App. 1.3). Moral “gilding or staining ”might
take its colouring from internal sentiment, but it seems to be causal reasoning that iserecting the structure and working out where to apply the paint.
aims to replace such inaccurate ideas (cf. EHU 7.3 –5), not to endorse them: there is no suggestion here that
such vulgar projection is somehow inevitable for us.
⁴⁹Reason here is our cognitive faculty, “by which we discern Truth and Falshood ”(1748, 1.4n.), whether
of relations of ideas or matters of fact (e.g. T 3.1.1.9; EPM App. 1.6). This appears to be Hume ’s standard
use of the term, in common with most of his contemporaries (see Peter Millican, “Hume ’s‘Scepticism ’
about Induction. ”InThe Continuum Companion to Hume , eds. Alan Bailey and Dan O ’Brien (London:
Continuum, 2012), pp. 79 –87), and he describes reason accordingly in all of his main works ( “Reason is the
discovery of truth or falshood, ”T 3.1.1.9; “reason . . . conveys the knowledge of truth and falsehood, ”EPM
App. 1.21; “reason, in a strict sense, as meaning the judgment of truth and falsehood, ”DP 5.1).OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
  
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
Hume ’s main discussion of moral metaphysics in the second Enquiry ends with a
paragraph aiming to summarise “the distinct boundaries and ofﬁ ces of reason and of
taste” (EPM App. 1.21). Reason “discovers objects, as they really stand in nature,
without addition or diminution, ”while taste is famously “productive, ”“gilding or
staining . . . natural objects with the colours, borrowed from internal sentiment. ”
Causal judgements regarding the “tendencies of actions” (etc.) clearly fall within
the domain of reason, ⁵⁰despite the fact that these seem on Hume ’s theory to be
coloured by the internal “sentiment or impression ”of“customary transition” or
“connexion ”(EHU 7.28, 30). Why, then, cannot moral judgements equally count as
operations of reason, when apparently the crucial factor preventing them from being
similarly objective is a parallel kind of sentimental gilding? Hume does not address
this question directly, but in both the Treatise and the second Enquiry his emphasis
seems to be on the action-guiding nature of ethics (e.g. T 3.1.1.6) and its association
with human desires (e.g. EPM App. 1.18 –20). The “sentiment of approbation ”in
positive moral judgement is pleasurable and action-guiding, whereas the “sentiment
or impression ”of necessary connexion (associated with causal inference) is appar-
ently “cool and disengaged ”(EPM App. 1.21). Thus Hume ’s distinction here seems
to come down to the familiar divide between the conative and the cognitive .
Much more could be said on these matters, but we have already seen enough to
cast doubt on the tendency to classify Hume ’s causal and moral theories together
under the vague and potentially anachronistic banner of “projectivism. ”Certainly
there is material in his texts that could inspire the development of more closely
parallel theories, for example Blackburn’ squasi-realism that ties both causal and
moral judgements to the distinctive attitudes manifested by the corresponding
“impressions ”(of customary inference, and of approval), and views both as “pro-
jective ”for that reason. ⁵¹ It can even be argued —with some plausibility —that such
accounts provide the best way of articulating a Humean theory in contemporary
terms. ⁵² We must be wary, however, of over-interpreting Hume ’s own texts, for
example by seeing metaphysical “projection ”in contexts where his own aims might
be more modest (e.g. merely to identify an impression of re ﬂection to satisfy the
empiricist requirements of his Copy Principle). Moreover, the famous “gilding or
staining ”passage— the one that is most overtly indicative of genuine (as opposed to
fallacious) projection —can be read as simply attempting to characterise how taste
differs from reason , which “discovers objects, as they really stand in nature, without
addition or diminution ”(EPM App. 1.21, my emphasis). Taste adds something , in the
form of a positive emotive colouring, which Hume evidently sees as driving it away
⁵⁰As quoted above from EPM App. 1.3, and see also for example T 1.3.15.2, 2.3.3.3, 3.1.1.12, and EPM
App. 1.2.
⁵¹ See Simon Blackburn, “Hume and Thick Connexions, ”in Millican, Reading Hume , pp. 259 –76,
especially p. 269, n. 19.
⁵² For such an argument, see §3.5 of Peter Millican, “Against the ‘New Hume ’.”InThe New Hume
Debate, Revised Edition , eds. Rupert Read and Kenneth Richman (London: Routledge, 2007), pp. 211 –52.
Likewise, in “Hume, Causal Realism, and Causal Science ”(pp. 664– 5), I drew on T 1.3.9.3 –5 to suggest that
Hume sees causal judgements, like moral judgements, as raising “a new creation. ”I would now be more
cautious about attributing these positions to Hume himself.OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
    ’    
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
from the realm of reason, and thus from causal judgement. ⁵³ On Blackburn ’s
quasi-realist account, by contrast, the projective construction of sentiment-gilded
quasi-facts is supposed to provide a basis for objectivized descriptions, which thus
enable truth and reason to come into play regarding both causation and morality.
This contrast suggests that although quasi-realist and other “projectivist ”theories
that draw very close parallels between causation and morality may seem Humean in
spirit, and might even perhaps represent a plausible ultimate destination for philo-
sophical developments that we see taking place in Hume ’s thought between the
Treatise and the Enquiries , they are unlikely to match in detail any position that he
himself occupied.
. Conclusion
The overall outcome of our investigation should not be at all surprising: we havefound that the main philosophical publications of Hume ’s maturity, the Enquiry
concerning Human Understanding and the Enquiry concerning the Principles of
Morals —written at leisure and subsequently reﬁ ned through numerous editions —
exhibit many parallel developments that represent signi ﬁcant improvements, both
presentational and philosophical, over the youthful and hastily published Treatise .
Most philosophers, if they are good and remain active, will develop and improve theirthoughts over time, and there is no reason to think of Hume as exceptional in thisregard. More speci ﬁcally, we have excellent evidence of his growing dissatisfaction
with the Treatise , starting barely four months after the publication of Books 1 and 2
with a letter of 1 June 1739 to Henry Home (HL i 31), continuing with a letter of 16March 1740 to Francis Hutcheson (HL i. 38 –9), then later that year the doubts
expressed in the Treatise Appendix , followed by further consistently negative com-
ments in 1745 (LFG 41), 1751 (HL i. 158, to Gilbert Elliot) and 1754 (HL i. 187, toJohn Stewart). Most of these concern issues in Book 1, the source also of most of thecriticism (e.g. from Reid and Beattie) that apparently prompted Hume to composethe famous “Advertisement” sent to his printer William Strahan in 1775 (HL ii 301),
describing the Treatise as a “juvenile work ”and asking that his later writing be taken
as authoritative. Perhaps for this reason, the “Advertisement” has generally been
afﬁxed only to subsequent editions of the ﬁrstEnquiry —the recast Book 1— but this
risks giving a false impression, because “the following Pieces ”which it endorsed
included also the Dissertation on the Passions , the second Enquiry , and the Natural
History of Religion , combined within the second (and ﬁnal) volume of Hume ’sEssays
and Treatises on Several Subjects. Modern editions have separated these works, but itis clear that Hume wished them to be seen as together “containing his philosophical
⁵³ Another potential factor here is the observer-relativity of judgements of taste, since the pleasure or
pain they involve can depend on the constitution or situation of the observer (or indeed on custom or
caprice , T 2.1.8.2), though we commonly attempt to adjust for such distorting factors in order to reach
more stable judgements (T 3.3.1.15, EPM 1.9). Hume ’s exploration of moral relativity in “A Dialogue ”
bears interesting comparison with the discussion of aesthetic judgement in “Of the Standard of Taste ”
28–31. But observer-relativity does not feature prominently in the passages where Hume is distinguishing
between taste and reason.OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
  
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
sentiments and principles. ”⁵⁴Moreover, we have seen plenty of evidence that he
himself would have been just as keen to insist on the second Enquiry as the
authoritative statement of his moral philosophy, as he was to insist on the ﬁrst
Enquiry as the authoritative statement of his “metaphysics. ”⁵⁵
Hume ’s own preferences notwithstanding, the tendency of most philosophical
scholarship for many years has been to focus overwhelmingly on the Treatise , and
to consider his two Enquiries as providing relatively lightweight summaries of a few
key discussions for more popular consumption, written to pursue “literary fame”
(and perhaps to provoke the “zealots ”).⁵⁶Over the last couple of decades this
consensus has weakened quite signi ﬁcantly, at least in respect of the ﬁrstEnquiry ,
which has been increasingly discussed as a serious work of philosophy in its own
right. I like to think that my own edited volume of 2002, Reading Hume on Human
Understanding, played a useful role in stimulating and contributing to this growing
trend. It is very much to be hoped that the current companion volume, Reading
Hume on the Principles of Morals , will likewise help to undermine the traditional
dismissive perspective on Hume ’s second Enquiry , which equally deserves to be taken
very seriously as an independent, distinctive, and major work of philosophy. ⁵⁷
Perhaps in time we shall even see a sustained focus on Hume’ s mature philosophy
as a whole , viewing the later works more in relation to each other —as parts of an
integrated and carefully considered philosophical system —than as writings whose
interest is mainly to be understood by reference to the “juvenile ”Treatise .⁵⁸
⁵⁴Hence Lorne Falkenstein and Neil McArthur ’s recent edition that combines the works is to be
applauded: David Hume, Essays and Treatises on Philosophical Subjects , eds. Lorne Falkenstein and Neil
McArthur (Peterborough, ON: Broadview Editions, 2013).
⁵⁵Indeed, perhaps if anything more so, judging from the fundamental changes discussed in §§5 –7
above, which also might help to explain why Hume so pointedly recommended the second Enquiry to
posterity as “of all my writings, historical, philosophical, or literary, incomparably the best ”(MOL, 10).
⁵⁶In“My Own Life, ”Hume famously describes “love of literary fame” as his “ruling passion ”(21) and
expresses his disappointment that the Treatise failed “even to excite a murmur among the zealots ”(6).
Building on such comments, Sir Amhurst Selby-Bigge in ﬂuentially alleged, in his standard edition of the
Enquiries , that the religious topics were included primarily for the sake of fame and notoriety ( ESB viii).
But few scholars would now endorse this cynical view, given our increased awareness of the range, quality,
seriousness, and sheer volume of Hume ’s writings on religion. Indeed, as explained in §2 above, it is the
Treatise that was arti ﬁcially doctored in respect of the treatment of religion (and hence fails to re ﬂect
Hume ’s deepest commitments), having been “castrated ”to remove the most forthrightly offending parts.
⁵⁷Happily, there have been signs of a similar positive trend in respect of the second Enquiry (thus
facilitating the current volume), and Jacqueline Taylor has been a particularly signi ﬁcant stimulant of and
contributor to this trend.
⁵⁸I am very grateful to Amyas Merivale for numerous discussions relating to the development of
Hume ’s philosophy, especially in respect of the theory of the passions, and likewise to James Arnold and
Jackie Taylor for discussion of Hume ’s ethics. Thanks also to audiences at the Scottish Seminar for Early
Modern Philosophy and Oxford Hume Forum (2017), the Budapest Hume Conference (2018), and thethird “Recasting the Treatise ”workshop (2019).OUP CORRECTED PROOF –FINAL, 12/2/2020, SPi
    ’    
Reading Hume on the Principles of Morals, edited by Jacqueline Taylor, Oxford University Press, Incorporated, 2020.
         ProQuest Ebook Central, http://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/oxford/detail.action?docID=6129335.
Created from oxford on 2023-10-08 12:25:34.
Copyright © 2020. Oxford University Press, Incorporated. All rights reserved.
