Hume  on Free Will and Moral Responsibility  
Peter Millican  
Hertford College, Oxford , and the National University of Singapore1 
David Hume’s views on morality – the topic of both Book  3 of his Treatise of Human Nature  (1740), and of his 
Enquiry concerning the Principles of Morals  (1751) – are widely familiar and much discussed, but his view of 
moral responsibility  is far less well known, and even rather obscure.  To piece this view together, we must 
exam ine his theory of intentional agency, which – in the tradition  of Thomas Hobbes – he expounds under the 
heading  “Of Liberty and Necessity” .  But there are significant discrepancies b etween his discussions of this 
topic in Book  2 of the Treatise  of Human Nature  (1739) and his Enquiry concerning Human Understanding  
(1748).  And his theory has been widely misunderstood for a number of reasons, including confusion about his 
theory of caus al necessity, and a tendency to view his thought through the lens of subsequent writers in the 
tradition of empiricist compatibilism.  So although Hume’s writings “of liberty and necessity” are amongst the 
most widely known in the philosophical canon , achieving a reliable interpretation of his settled opinion on these 
topics – and on the closely related topic of moral responsibility – requires careful analysis.  
1.  Hume’s  Theory of Causation  
Hume famously – albeit controversially – understands  causation as fundamentally a matter of  “constant 
conjunction”  between types of event , where the cause is regularly followed by the effect .2  Many of his readers 
down the years have interpreted this theory  as either exhibiting  sceptic ism about the very existence of causal 
relations, or as implicitly denying th at there is any genuine  causal  necessity  between a  cause and its effect.  But 
both of these  interpretative claims are incorrect  if we understand the relevant terms in accordance w ith his own 
theory .  First,  Hume clearly believe s in causa l relations  as understood on the regularity account , and indeed 
frames explicit rules to identify them : 
“it may be proper to fix some general rules, by which we may know when [objects]  really are … causes or 
effects to each other. ”  (T 1.3.15.2, cf. T 1.3.13.11 ) 
“all objects, which are found to be constantly conjoin’d, are upon that account only to be r egarded as causes 
and effects. ”  (T 1.4.5.32)  
Secondly, Hume insists – both before and after developing  this theory – that necessity is essential to causation .  
Indeed , his long investigation into the origin (and hence nature ) of our “idea of necessary connexion” takes off 
from this premise, when he a sks what more  is needed for the causal relation  to hold between two “objects”,  
besides (single -case) contiguity and temporal priority:  
“An object may be contiguous and prior to another, without being consider’d as its cause.  There is a 
NECESSARY CONNEXION  to be taken into consideration; and that relation is of much greater importanc e, than 
any of the other two above -mention’d .”  (T 1.3.2.11)  
To achieve a clearer understanding of this key idea, Hume employs what is commonly known as his Copy 
Principle, for which he has previously argued (in T 1.1.1 and EHU  2): 
 
1 This paper was completed  while serving as Visiting Professor  in Philosophy  at the National University of Singapore, and I 
would like to thank my colleagues there for their helpful discussions and feedback, especially Hsueh Qu and Daryl Ooi.  
2 For detailed discussion of Hume’s theory of causation, see in particular  Millican (2021) .  This make s reference to various  earlier 
interpretative debates, which are mainly ignored here.  2 
 “It seems a proposition, which will not admit of much dispute, that all our ideas are nothing but copies of 
our impressions, or, in other words, that it is impossible for us to think  of any thing, whic h we have not 
antecedently felt, either by our external or internal senses. ”  (EHU  7.4, cf. T 1.3.14.1 ) 
This is the core of his conceptual empiricism , whereby all the contents  of our thoughts are derived either from 
external sense experience (sight, touch, hearing etc.), or from internal “reflection” (feelings, emotions etc.).  
Hume eventually ( T 1.3.14.20, EHU  7.28)  tracks down the “impression of necessary connexion” to something 
that we under stand through reflection, namely  customary transition  of the mind  from observed cause A to 
expected effect B, in response to repeated observation of As followed by Bs – what we now call inductive 
inference .  His declared success in this quest clearly indic ates that he takes the corresponding idea to be  
legitimate, since it has a genuine  – though surprising – impression -source , rather than being a confused 
“fiction”,3  Hume then frames on  this basis two “definitions of cause”, the first couched in terms of constant 
conjunction and  the second in terms of mental inference:  
“Similar objects are always conjoined with similar.   Of this we have experience.  Suitably to this experience, 
therefore, we may define a cause to be  an object, followed by another, and wher e all the objects, similar to 
the first, are followed by objects similar to the second .  …  The appearance of a cause always conveys the 
mind, by a customary transition, to the idea of the effect.  Of this also we have experience.  We may, 
therefore, suitably to this experience, form another definition of cause; and call it,  an object followed by  
another, and whose appearance always conveys the thought to that other .”  (EHU  7.29, cf. T 1.3.14.31)  
The prominent role of mental inference in these discussions has led many interpreters to presume that he is a 
subjectivist  about causal necessity  (in the  sense of considering such necessity to be observer -relative ), and hence 
denies it as an objective factor within causal relations.  But th is is to ignore that Hume goes on  in both works  – 
and almost immediately  in the Enquiry  – to provide two parallel “def initions of necessity”, again in terms of 
constant conjunction and mental inference.   These  serve to vindicate his claim that necessity is essential  to 
causality , on both definitions : 
“According to my definitions, necessity makes an essential part of causa tion” (T 2.3.1.18, cf. EHU  8.25) ; 
“Necessity may be defined two ways, conformably to  the two definitions of cause , of which it makes an 
essential part”  (EHU  8.27, cf. T 2.3.2.4).  
So Hume is neither sceptical about causal relations nor about causal necessity, as long as these are understood 
in accordance with his definitions.   Let us now go on to see how Hume applies these definitions in arguing for 
the deterministic thesis which he calls “the doctrine of necessity”.  
2.  The “ Doctrine of Necessity”  
Hume’s discussions entitled “Of liberty and necessity”  – in both Treatise  2.3.1 -2 and Enquiry  8 – are largely 
devoted to establishing what he calls the doctrine of necessity  in the sphere of human behaviour.   This doctrine 
states that all such behaviour is subject to causal necessity .  On Hume’s  view as explained above , such causal 
necessity is simply a matter  of events’ occurring in conformity with  deterministic causal laws , from which, 
therefore, those events could be predicted  at least in principle  (i.e. by a hypothetical being who knows all the 
relevant initial conditions and laws, and is able to calculate their workings in detail) .  But previous philosoph ical 
orthodoxy, as represented by  the influential Newtonian Samuel Clarke , took causal necessity  to involve  more 
than mere conformity  with predictive laws.  For Clarke, real necessity  is to be understood on the model of 
 
3 In contrast with the bogus notions of substance , accident , and inherence , for example, rejected at T 1.4.3.3 -8 and 1.4.5.2 -6. 3 
 mechanical impulse  – when one body in motion smashes into another and forces it  to move – so it is a mistake 
to think of in telligent agents – acting on reasons or motives – to be subject to such necessity.  We might call 
such agents’  behaviour “morally necessary” in the sense of being entirely predictable in principle  (i.e. the 
minimal deterministic “necessity” that Hume endor ses), but if so, that is “merely a figurative Manner of 
Speaking ” and “not indeed any Necessity  at all” (Clarke 1717, 15 -17).4 
 One of the main aims of Hume’s discussion s “Of liberty and necessity”  is to undermine th is alleged 
distinction between physical  and moral  necessity,  by arguing that our only possible understanding of causal 
necessity is in terms of his two definitions , and that these apply equally to the physical and moral (i.e. human) 
worlds.   So Hume’s primary motivation in applying his Copy Principle to track down the “impression of 
necessary connexion” seems to be  to circumscribe the limits of what we can possibly mean  by causal necessity.  
On th is basis, he insists  that t hose such as Clarke who claim that “th ere is something else in the operations of 
matter ” – some  form of supposed genuine necessity  that goes beyond anything in human behaviour  – are using 
terms that have no corresponding idea, and are therefore “unintelligible” ( T 2.3.2.4, cf. A 34, EHU  8.22).5 
 Hume’s argument for the doctrine of necessity (i.e. determinism) within the human sphere  aims first to 
establish and then build on  these conceptual claims, though many of the points that he makes  here are relatively 
independent of his concept empiricis m.  He starts from what he takes to be the  “universally ” agreed 
predictability of “the operations of external bodies”, in which “Every  object is determin ’d by an absolute fate 
to a certain degree and direction of its motion ” with  “not the least tr aces of indifference or liberty ” (T 2.3.1.3), 
and “ every natural effect is so precisely determined by the energy of its cause, that no other effect, in such 
particular circumstances, could possibly have resulted from it ” (EHU  8.4).  Then he refers back to his two 
definitions of cause , and draws from them two parallel criteria  of causal necessity , which he aims to prove appl y 
to the human world as much as to the physical:  
“Here then are two particulars, which we are to consider as essential to necessity, viz . the constant union  and 
the inference  of the mind; and wherever we discover these we must acknowledge a necessity .”  (T 2.3.1.4)  
The version in the Enquiry  is more explicit about the conceptual  or semantic aspect of this argument  – that it 
hinges on questions of meaning  as determined by the limits of our ideas : 
“Our idea, therefore, of necessity and causation arises entirely from the uniformity, observable in the 
operations of nature; where similar objects are constantly conjoined  together, and the mind is determined by 
custom to infer the one from the appearance of the other.  These two circumstances form the whole of that 
necessity, which we ascribe to matter.  Beyond the constant conjunction  of similar objects, and the 
consequen t inference  from one to the other, we have no notion of any necessity, or connexion.”  ( EHU  8.5) 
 
4 Clarke appears to accept that human behaviour is predictable in principle, since he appeals to this in explaining God’s 
foreknowledge of our actions  – for discussion, see Millican (2010, p.  619).   However in the Leibniz -Clarke Correspondence  (e.g. 
the first paragraph of his fourth reply), Clarke considers the possibility of an intelligent agent whose motives are “absolute ly 
indifferent” between two alternatives, insisting that in such a case the a gent – having active powers – would be able to choose 
one of the alternatives (unlike a physical balance which, being merely passive, would remain static  if acted upon by equal 
weights ).  If God allowed such indifference to occur, then presumably His forek nowledge would require a different explanation.  
5 Quite apart from any doubts about Hume’s Copy Principle and his determinism, one might reasonably be suspicious of his 
apparent implicit denial of a distinction between physical and moral causation, in so far as the former concerns events that are  
explicable only in terms of physical laws, whereas the latter concerns actions  whose explanation involves reference to motives , 
intentions , plans , strategies , or other  forward -looking consideratio ns.  “Moral causation” in this sense need not, however, be 
confi ned to actions of conscious agents, as illustrated by artificial intelligence  systems (such as chess computers) and arguably 
by evolutionary phenomena . 4 
 An entry in Hume’s  own index to the Enquiry  – “NECESSITY , its definition” – makes explicit that he understands 
this last statement as defini ng necessity  (and refers also to the passage from EHU  8.27 quoted earlier ).  The 
index has a quite separate entry for “ CAUSE  and EFFECT  … Its Definition”, referring to the two definitions of 
cause at EHU  7.29 ( and the  footnote EHU  8.25 n.  19).  So Hume clearly distinguishes his definitions of necessity 
from these earlier and more famous two definitions  of cause , though they are obviously closely related.  
 As we have seen, Hume casts this argument in semantic  terms – as restricting what we can possibly 
understand or mean  by causal necessity  – in order to undermine the orthodox claim that “moral” and “physical” 
causation are of a different nature.  But he also implicitly appeals to this semantic theme when attempting to 
dissolve the debate as having turned hitherto on a misunderstanding : 
“If it appear, therefore, that all mankind have ever allowed, without any doubt or hesitation, that these two 
circumstances take place in the voluntary actions of men, and in the operations of mind; it must follow, that 
all mankind have eve r agreed in the doctrine of necessity, and that they have hitherto disputed, merely for 
not understanding each other. ”  (EHU 8.5-6) 
This attempted dissolution might seem a bit far -fetched with regard to “the most contentious question, of 
metaphysics, the most contentious science” ( EHU 8.23), but Hume starts by arguing that the debate’s  very 
intractability is indicative of  some  persisting misunderstanding  (EHU  8.1-3). 
 The bulk of Hume’s argument, however, appeals to considerations that see m observational  more than 
semantic , because they emphasise not so much people’s assumptions about the regularity of human behaviour 
– and the fact that they make inferences accordingly – but rather , that such regularity actually obtains, so that 
such infer ence is in fact  reliabl e.  Accordingly, t he first part of his strategy is to “prove from experience that our 
actions have a constant union with our motives, tempers, and circumstances” ( T 2.3.1.4, cf. EHU  8.7).  After 
giving a variety of examples to support and illustrate this claim ( T 2.3.1.5 -10, EHU  8.7-15), Hume concludes 
“that the conjunction between motives and voluntary actions is as regular and uniform, as that between the cause 
and effect in any part of nature” ( EHU  8.16, cf. T 2.3.1.12).  In the Enquiry , he also at this point claims to have 
shown “that this regular conjunction has been universally acknowledged among mankind”, in which case “it 
may seem superfluous to prove, that this experienced uniformity in human actions is a source whence w e draw 
inferences  concerning them” ( EHU  8.16), though he goes on to illustrate the latter anyway ( EHU  8.17-20).  In 
the Treatise , he separates out this last task of showing “that as the union  betwixt motives and actions has the 
same constancy, as that in a ny natural operations, so its influence on the understanding is also the same, in 
determining  us to infer the existence of one from that of another” ( T 2.3.1.14).  His argument for this mixes 
illustration ( T 2.3.1.15 and 17) with appeal to his theory of ne cessity ( T 2.3.1.16 and 18).  
3.  Determinism, Chance, and Some Reservations  
Hume’s argument for “the doctrine of necessity”, though perhaps reasonably persuasive, is by no means 
compelling.  The complexity of the human brain and associated faculties (both sensory and motor) render it 
hopelessly unfeasible to establish, in the sphere of human behaviour, that there are “ not the least traces of 
indifference or liberty ”, or that “ every effect is so precisely determined, that no other effect, in such particular 
circumstances, could possibly have resulted ” (cf. T 2.3.1.3 and EHU  8.4, as quoted above).  Even in the physical 
world , such claims are dubious  (as has been emphasised by the emergence of quantum mechanics) , but at least 
there it is possible to test and measure isolated systems (such as colliding balls) with relatively great accuracy, 
thus giving a plausible basis for extrapolation to more complex phenomena.  But there is obviously no way of 5 
 even beginning to study – let alone to measure – human thought and behaviour in isolation  from the 
unfathomable complexity of our bodies and our environment (both physical and social).  Determinism about the 
mind and behaviour may well be plausible, but it cannot be founded  on direct experimental confirmation, and 
is likely to derive support instead from more general considerations – and perhaps prejudices  – such as the desire 
for explanatory completeness (thus ruling out randomness), the belief that mental phenomena are dep endent on 
a deterministic physical substrate  (as strongly suggested by evolutionary considerations) , and the conceptual 
difficulty of envisaging a non -random alternative to causal explanation.6 
 In the eighteenth century, following Newton’s impressive ach ievements and long before  quantum 
indeterminacy could even be conceived of, physical determinism was widely taken for granted .  Those inclined 
to materialism, such as Hobbes and Hume, would naturally wish to extend determinism equally to the “moral” 
sphere  of human behaviour, on the basis that humans – like everything else in the world – are purely material 
beings .  But Christians  like Clarke , believing in a realm of immaterial spirits , typically considered mental 
causation as acting quite differently.  Bot h sides , however,  were equally committed to the Causal Maxim 
discussed in Treatise  1.3.3, that “ whatever begins to exist, must have a cause of existence ”.  As Hume says, 
“This is commonly taken for granted in all reasonings, without any proof given or dema nded” ( T 1.3.3.1).  And 
the Maxim was also commonly understood as extending to any change , not just new beginnings of existence.  
So both materialists and Christians  were typically committed to universal causation , but differed in respect of 
the kinds of c ausation  they countenanced, and in particular, whether human behaviour involved purposive 
causation by spirits  (as opposed to mechanical causation by bodies).  Neither of these sides would typically 
understand causation as involving randomness , because while  materialists tended to attribute all causation to 
deterministic matter, Christians opposed the  “Epicurean” hypothesis of chance  as dangerously atheistic.   Hume 
was therefore reflecting this consensus when he reported as “commonly allow’d by philosoph ers, that what the 
vulgar call chance is nothing by a secret and conceal’d cause” ( T 1.3.12.1).7 
 All this helps to explain why Hume’s case for the “doctrine of necessity” – understood as equivalent to 
universal determinism – can seem to us rather vague a nd complacent.  At best it shows that determinism about 
human behaviour might plausibly  be true, because just as we presume that unpredictab le changes in our health 
(EHU  8.14) and the weather ( EHU  8.15) are explicable by underlying physical causes  (even wh en these causes 
may be u nknown, and are anyway far too complex for us to work out in detail); so “The philosopher, if he be 
consistent, must apply the same reasoning to the actions and volitions of intelligent agents” ( EHU  8.15).   In the 
case of the physic al world, however, Hume is able to offer rather more, because here , not only can “the 
philosopher” reasonably consider it “at least possible [that] the contrariety of events [proceeds] … from the 
secret operation of contrary causes”; but also, “This possib ility [may be]  converted into certainty by farther 
observation; when … upon an exact scrutiny, a contrariety of effects always betrays a contrariety of causes ”.  
Hume gives the example of a clock or watch that stops  unexpectedly , and an artisan who , on exa mining it,  finds 
a grain of dust interfering with the mechanism .  “From the observation of several parallel instances, philosophers 
form a maxim ” that superficial variability “proceeds from the secret opposition of contrary causes” ( EHU  8.13).  
This is the  closest that Hume comes to giving solid evidence  for the truth of determinism.  But there is no such 
 
6 For related remarks about the popular “causal closure of physics” doctrine, see Millican 2010, pp.  636-7. 
7 See also T 2.3.1.18, EHU  6.1 and  8.25, and for detailed discussion of Hume’s determinism, Millican (2010).  6 
 relative solidity to be had in the world  of mind and behaviour , where hidden mechanisms cannot be opened up 
and examined in detail .  So again, Hume’s case looks less than totally convincing.  
 The same can be said for his claim “that the conjunction between motives and voluntary actions is as 
regular and uniform, as that between the cause and effect in any part of nature” ( EHU  8.16) .  For motives result 
in actions only through complex causal chains involving bodies and other physical things, with many potential 
obstacles on the way .  Indeed, Hume  had observed  in just the previous paragraph  how physical circumstances 
can impact on us, potentially af fecting both our motives and our ability to act on them :8 
“A person of an obliging disposition gives a peevish answer: But he has the toothake, or has not dined.”  
(EHU  8.15)  
Hence his specific focus on “the conjunction between motives and voluntary actio ns” seems to be a slip  
(cf. Botterill 2002, pp. 285 -6).  His overall view leaves him  free to a cknowledg e the complex interplay between 
mental and physical, and  to expect deterministic patterns across the entire system , but not necessarily withi n 
just the “ moral” sphere . 
4.  Introducing “Hypothetical Liberty”  
In his discussion “Of liberty and necessity” in Treatise  2.3.1 -2, Hume mostly uses the term  “liberty” not as 
applying specifically to human action, but as meaning simply chance  or absence  of necessity  (e.g. T 2.3.2.2, 
2.3.2.6 -7) – something which, as we have seen, he rejects .  He there refers to  “free -will”  only once , equating it 
with both “liberty”  and “chance”, and accordingly denying its existence also ( T 2.3.1.18).  This might suggest 
that Hume takes a  “hard determinist” position , denying moral freedom  on the basis that we are causally 
determined.  But  on the contrary,  at T 2.3.2.5 -7 he argues that his deterministic  position, so far from undermining 
morality, is essential  to it; then  in Book  3 he goes on to develop in detail his own positive theory of morality.  
When he came to write the Enquiry , Hume corrected the false impression of hard determinism by endorsing  
“liberty”, having defined it quite differently from his usage in the Treat ise, and as entirely consistent with 
determinism.  
“By liberty, … we can only mean a power of acting or not acting, according to the determinations of the 
will; that is, if we chuse to remain at rest, we may; if we chuse to move, we also may.  Now this hypo thetical 
liberty is universally allowed to belong to every one, who is not a prisoner and in chains. ”  (EHU  8.23)  
The same paragraph famously starts by describing this discussion as a “reconciling project with regard to the 
question of liberty and necessit y”, so Hume’s  compatibilis t intention  is entirely explicit.  
But the precise nature of his compatibilist theory is  not so clear.   Looking back on some occasion when I 
have moved or stayed at rest – to follow Hume’s example  – a minimal interpretation of his “hypothetical  liberty ” 
might simply require that the act I performed was in fact  in accordance with my will:  
 Either  I willed t o move, and did move; or I willed to stay at rest, and did stay at rest.  
But a more fulsome interpretation would require also a counterfactual condition, such as:  
 If I had willed differently, then my action would have been correspondingly different.  
 
8 Note also that Hume attacks supposed theoretical objections to the possibilit y of mental/physical causa l interaction  by appeal to 
his theory of causation, in an  important pro -materialist argument at T 1.4.5.30 -33. 7 
 It might be suggested that  Hume ought to favour the minimal interpretation, on the basis that  his determinism 
would rule  out the counterfactual possibility of my having willed differently , or to respect the puzzling  
T 1.3.14.34  corollary to his definitions of  cause , that “The distinction, which we often make betwixt power  and 
the exercise  of it, is … without foundation” ( Penelhum 2000, p. 162) .  But determinists are generally happy 
with counterfactuals corresponding to causal laws, while  Hume’s commitment to h is implausible corollary 
weakens when he considers our passions and probabilistic thinking  (T 2.1.10.4, 6, 10; 2.2.5.7).  Indeed the 
corollary is absent from the Enquiry , where Hume’s  chosen term – “hypothetical  liberty” – strongly suggests a 
counterfactua l interpretation.  Moreover his choice of example here – moving or not moving – is suggestively 
reminiscent of the discussion in Locke’s Essay , which seems explicitly to require the two -way (counterfactual) 
power of the more fulsome interpretation:  
“so far as a Man has a power to think, or not to think; to move, or not to move, according to the preference 
or direction of his own mind, so far is a Man Free .  Where -ever any performance or forbearance are not 
equally in a Man’s power; wh ere-ever doing or not doing, will not equally follow upon the preference of his 
mind directing it, there he is not Free , though perhaps the Action may be voluntary.”  ( Essay  II xxi  8) 
Given Hume’s Lockean background, and “the absence of any Humean signals to the contrary”, Bricke suggests 
that “it is reasonable to read Hume’s doctrine in the standard … way”, as involving two -way “implementability 
of relevant alternatives” (2008, p.  208).   This seems right, but before confidently drawing this conclusion, we 
need to examine some further textual complications . 
5.  “Liberty of Spontaneity”  and a Puzzling Mismatch  
In Treatise  2.3.2, Hume attempts to explain why people are falsely  tempted to think of their actions as 
undetermined , and argues against the concern th at determinism would undermine morality .  Much of this 
discussion is reproduced in Enquiry  8 (21-2 and 26 -31), but the best -known passage is confined to the Treatise : 
“Few are capable of distinguishing betwixt the liberty of spontan eity, as it is call’d in  the schools, and the 
liberty of indifference ; betwixt that which is oppos’d to violence, and that which means a negation of 
necessity and causes.  The first is even the most common sense of the word; and as ’tis only that species of 
liberty, which it  conc erns us to preserve, our thoughts have been principally turn’d towards it ”  (T 2.3.2.1)  
Here Hume gives a clear impression of endorsing the “liberty of spontaneity ” as his favoured account of free 
will, though the term does not appear at all in the  Enquiry .  This quite strongly suggests that it is another name 
for his “hypothetical liberty”, especially when both are contrasted with just one other sense of “liberty”, namely 
indifference  or chance , and in the light of Hume’s emphatic statement at EHU  8.23 that if we speak of “liberty” 
in any reasonable  sense, “ we can only mean ” his hypothetical liberty .  But the first sentence of this initial 
paragraph in the Treatise  significantly  mudd ies the water:  
“I believe we may assign t he three following reasons for the prevalence of the doctrine of liberty, however 
absurd it may be in one sense, and unintelligible in any other .  …”  (T 2.3.2.1)  
This seems to imply that “liberty”  is absurd  if understood as indifference, and  unintelligibl e otherwise .  So 
“liberty of spontaneity ” is unintelligible,  even though Hume then goes on to refer to it as “the most common 
sense of the word; and … that species of liberty, which it concerns us to preserve”.  But how can it concern us 
to preserve someth ing that is unintelligible?  And if , on the other hand,  “liberty of spontaneity ” is indeed 
intelligible, then isn’t it perverse that elsewhere in  the Treatise  Hume prefers to use “liberty” in something other 
than its “most common sense”, and indeed another sense that he himself calls “absurd ”? 8 
 But putting aside any such  perversity, and assuming that the liberty of spontaneity  of the Treatise  is indeed 
intelligible , does this really equate with the hypothetical liberty  of the Enquiry ?  Most previous s cholars have 
indeed affirmed this identification,  but it  seems hard to square with Hume’s statement s that his hypothetical 
liberty  is “universally allowed to belong to every one, who is not a prisoner and in chains ”, whereas by contrast 
spontaneity i s “that species of liberty, which it  concerns us to preserve ” and which “ our thoughts [are] 
principally turn’d towards ” (thus suggesting that it is easily lost, and very far from universal) .  People anxious 
about their freedom are most commonly thinking about su ch things as political, religious, social or family 
pressures that constrain what they can do for fear of punishment or opprobrium; but they are relatively rarely in 
danger of being chained up in prison.   If, for example, a gang boss threatens that my fact ory will be burned 
down if I continue to compete with his business, or a community elder threatens me with social ostracism if I 
continue my relationship with some outsider, then I am likely to be seriously concerned by this impairment of 
my freedom.  But neither of these apparently deprives me of the minimal “hypothetical liberty” explicated in 
the Enquiry , which seems to amount to little more than a capacity for voluntary agency : to apply my will in 
whatever situation I am placed, with all its implied consequences and constraints .  For in these situations , if I 
choose to do as I have been ordered, I may; and if I choose to defy the instruction (and take the consequences), 
I also may.   So apparently I have “hypothetical libe rty”, but not the sort of freedom “which it concerns me to 
preserve”.  Which , then, is  the genuine Humean notion?  
6.  A Traditional Misreading, and a Resolution of the Puzzle  
I suspect that previous scholars have often viewed  Hume  through the lens of later  thinkers in the empiricist 
compatibilist tradition, such as A.  J. Ayer  in his classic essay “Freedom and Necessity”:  
“it is not, I think, causality that freedom is to be contrasted with, but constraint.  …  If I am constrained, I do 
not act freely.  …  An  obvious instance is the case in which I am compelled by another person to do what he 
wants.  … the compulsion need not be such as to deprive one of the power of choice.   …  [But] if … no 
reasonable person would be expected to choose the other alternative , then the action that I am made to do is 
not one for which I am held to be morally responsible.”  (Ayer 1954, pp.  278-9) 
Ayer’s identification of freedom with lack of constraint  (rather than  lack of causality ) seem s to echo Hume:  
“the idea of necessity [seems] to imply something of force, and violence, and constraint, of which we are not 
sensible ”  (T 2.3.2.1)  
“if the definition [of cause] above mentioned be admitted; liberty, when opposed to necessity, not to 
constraint, is the same thing with chance; whi ch is universally allowed to have no existence ”  (EHU  8.25)  
The first of these passages immediately precedes Hume’s mention of liberty of spontaneity  in the Treatise , 
which as we saw earlier , talks of such liberty as “oppos’d to violence” .  The second passage appears, in a similar 
spirit, to be distinguishing between liberty of indifference  – as “opposed to necessity”  – and Hume’s hypothetical 
liberty  – as “opposed … to constraint”.  
There is, however, a very different way of interpreting H ume’s language, which avoids the puzzling 
mismatch between “spontaneity” understood in Ayer ’s way  and “hypothetical liberty” as described in the 
Enquiry .  This alternative interpretation is strongly supported by a later passage in the Enquiry , where Hume  
explains why the latter notion is appropriate to moral appraisal:  
“It will be equally easy to prove, and from the same arguments, that liberty, according to that definition 
above mentioned, in which all men agree, is also essential to morality, and that no human actions, where it 
is wanting, are susceptible of any moral q ualities, or can be the objects either of approbation or dislike.  For 9 
 as actions are objects of our moral sentiment, so far only as they are indications of the internal character, 
passions, and affections; it is impossible that they can give rise either t o praise or blame, where they proceed 
not from these principles, but are derived altogether from external violence. ”  (EHU  8.31)  
An action that is “derived altogether from external violence” (e.g. being thrown downstairs by thugs) is quite 
different from a n action performed from fear of violence  (e.g. complying with the gang boss’s commands  for 
fear of being thrown downstairs).  And if Hume’s talk of “violence” in these contexts is thus understood, then 
this in turn suggests that when he speaks of “ force, a nd violence, and constraint ” in the Treatise  (T 2.3.2.1), he 
has in mind physical force, violence, and constraint  – which fits precisely with his reference in the Enquiry to 
the prisoner in chains.  I conclude, therefore, that  whereas Ayer’s paradigm of “constraint” is coercion by threat , 
Hume’s paradigm is physical restraint  such as by chains , or a straitjacket , or physical force .  Understood in this 
way, Hume’s “liberty of spontaneity” as “oppos’d to violence” ( T 2.3.2.1) fit s closely with “hypothetical liberty” 
as “universally allowed to belong to every one, who is not a prisoner and in chains” ( EHU  8.23).9 
7.  Two-Way Liberty  and What We Seek to Preserve  
If the sorts of constraints that Hume has in mind as thwarting  hypothe tical liberty are  indeed  physical  constraints 
such as prison walls and chains , then this gives extra support to the two-way or counterfactual interpretation of 
Hume’s “hypothetical liberty”  that was tentatively supported in  §4 above .  When thus constrained , details about 
the causal operations of our decision -making mental processes seem beside the point: our liberty is undermined 
in a far more straightforward way.  So I think  Hume would agree with Locke ( Essay  II xxi 10) that a man  who 
is locked  in a room w here he wishes to stay  (owing to the “desirable Company”) , may be staying voluntarily  – 
at least if he is unaware of the locked door – but he is not free with regard to staying or leaving.  Regardless of 
the operation of his will, or whatever might determine it, he does not physically have the power to leave.  
 Of course the man in the locked room is still free with regard to other  choices (e.g. whether or not to 
speak, to move, o r to attempt to leave) .  So this brings to light an issue implicit in Hume’s definition  of 
hypothetical liberty , but not explicitly noted by him ( nor by most commentators) ; namely,  that the “power of 
acting or not acting” can be und erstood as  relative to the choice in question .10  That being so, it might not after 
all be unreasonable to see this kind of liberty as one that we are anxious  to pre serve, not just minimally 
(e.g. moving our finger or not), but w ith as much scope as possib le, so that we have the power to do, or not to 
do, a multitude of different things.  In this way, our desire to remain out of prison  and unchained  can indeed be 
seen as concerned with maximising our “power of acting or not acting”.  If Hume was thinking al ong these 
lines, then he might after all have had the hypothetical liberty  of the Enquiry  in mind when, in the Treatise , he 
described liberty of spontaneity  as “that spe cies of liberty, which it  concerns us to preserve ”.  This would yield 
an interpretation  that neatly reconciles Hume’s favoured notions of liberty in the two works.  
 
9 Some contemporaries likewise  took “spontaneity” to mean simple voluntariness  (e.g. Watts 1732, pp. 5 -6; Ramsay 1751, pp. 
107, 295), wh ereas  others saw it as requir ing more rational control (Bayle 1697, “Rorarius” note F, pp. 228 -9; Voltaire 1764, 
p. 31). 
10 This point is easy to overlook when the discussion is couched – as it often  is – in terms of whether humans are “free agents” in 
an absolute sense, as opposed to being “free to do X”. 10 
 8.  Moral Responsibility  
Just one passage in Hume ’s philosophical writings – at T 2.3.2.6 – talks about the conditions for responsibility  
using that very term.11  But the points it makes are echoed elsewhere (notably EHU  8.29-30), and follow  familiar 
themes in his theory of moral appraisal , which focuses on  enduring  qualities of mind  in the agent that may be 
judged as either virtues  or vices : 
“… ’tis impossible, w ithout the necessary connexion of cause and effect in human actions, that punishments 
cou’d be inflicted compatible with justice and moral equity; …  The constant and universal object of hatred 
or anger is a person or creature endow’d with thought and cons ciousness; and when any criminal or injurious 
actions excite that passion, ’tis only by their relation to the person or connexion with him.  But according to 
the doctrine of liberty or chance, this connexion is reduc’d to nothing, …  Actions are by their v ery nature 
temporary and perishing; and where they proceed not from some cause in the characters and disposition of 
the person, who perform’d them, they … can neither redound to his honour, if good, nor infamy, if evil.  The 
action itself may be blameable;  …  But the person is not  responsible for it ; and as it proceeded from nothing 
in him, that is durable or constant, … ’tis impossible he can, upon its account, become the object of 
punishment or vengeance.  ’Tis only upon the principles of necessity, that a person acquires any merit or 
demerit from his actions”  ( T 2.3.2.6 , emphasis added ) 
According to Hume’s virtue ethical theory, we judge behaviour morally in terms of the qualities of mind  or 
character  that the relevant actions evince, rather than the type of action  (T 3.3.1.4, EPM  1.10).  And we judge 
these qualities of mind by their general tendencies  rather than specific consequences  (T 3.3.1. 30, EPM  9.12).  
In its ultimate form in the second Enquiry , this constitutes something like a utilitarian virtue ethics ,12 with 
reason  playing a crucial role in assessing these general tendencies of  characters, though sentiment  generates our 
approval of beneficial outcomes and disapproval of bad ( EPM  Appx  1.2-3).  In the Treatise , by contrast , Hume 
downplays the role of reason, and  devotes far more attention to  our moral sentiments, explaining how the 
mechanism of sympathy  plays a crucial role by causing the ideas that we have of other people’s pains and 
pleasures to become enlivened into impressions that we ourselves feel  (T 2.1.11.2 -7).13  This mechanism is non-
rational – just part of our natural psychology  – as is our tendency to feel distinctive moral sentiments  of approval 
and disapproval when we consider certain characters of mind and their good or bad tendencies from a  “general ” 
view (T 3.3.1.23 , 27-30). 
 Many scholars  have  accordingly seen the key to Humean moral responsibility as residing in these natural 
moral sentiments, notably Paul Russell  in his influential 1995 book Freedom & Moral Sentiment .  But there is 
an important distinction to be made here, b etween moral responsibility  and moral culpability .  Suppose  that an 
intentional act ion exhibits some quality of mind – maybe it is kind, or sadistic , or cautious .  If the act ion was 
kind or sadistic , then we would appropriately judge it (respectively) as virtuous or vicious , but if the act ion was 
cautious , then our judgement might well be morally neutral .  Though some people are indeed  more cautious 
than others , this  “quality of mind”  is neither an obvious virt ue nor an obvious vice : in different contexts, different 
degrees of caution can be appropriate.   But judging an action as morally neutral does not remove the agent’s 
 
11 It is also striking that Hume says very little about the conditions for just punishment  except within his short and posthumously 
published essay “Of the Immortality of the Soul”, as illuminatingly discussed by Russell (1995, ch. 10).  
12 For more details and discussion, see Millican (2012).  
13 This mechanism of s ympathy disappears from the second Enquiry , but is commonly assumed to  remain implicit.  My own 
view , however  (see Millican 202 0, §§5 -7), is that it is crucial in the Treatise  precisely because Hume is there developing his 
theory on an egoistic basis.  Its absence from the Enquiry , accordingly, reflects his new awareness – evident in the second 
Appendix  “Of Self -love” – that we are genuinely altruistic, and hence capable of caring about others without literally sharing in 
their feelings.  11 
 responsibility for it; it simply means that their responsibility for the action brings the m neither credit nor 
discredit .  In other words, it is one thing to be responsible  for an action; it is quite another to be morally 
praiseworthy  or morally culpable  for doing that action.  Moral assessment of an action  presupposes 
responsibility , but an ag ent can be responsible  without being either praiseworthy  or culpable . 
I suggest  that Hume’s account of hypothetical liberty  is intended to explain what it is to be responsible  
for an action, whereas his account of moral sentiments  is intended to explain wh at it is for  a responsible  action 
to have  a moral valence , either positive or negative.  I am free in Hume’s  sense with  respect to action A if my 
situation is such that, whether I choose to do A or to refrain from A, I shall be ab le to carry through that choice.  
The crucial “determination” here is in the causal chain between my volition  and the action  (rather than the 
causation of my volition ), so whether A occurs or not is suitably determined by my decision, and faithfully 
reflec ts it.  Thus  I am the voluntary author of what happens,  straightforwardly  responsible  for it because my 
volition was a determining factor  in its causation .  And if that volition reflects an enduring feature of my 
character, then the action will also reflec t my enduring character, thus providing an appropriate basis for morally 
judging me if the character thus revealed is virtuous or vicious.14  In such judgement , the moral sentiments 
indeed play a crucial role (as Russell emphasises) , but they are not crucial for assessing whether or not  I am 
responsible; only whether the action would redound to my credit or my discredit.  
This division of labour makes good sense of Hume’s text, and explains why he says so little to connect 
moral  senti ments with responsibility.15  It also provides a much cleaner way of analysing  some cases , as 
compared with Ayer’s very broad appeal to “constraint”  which treats coercion  as a paradigm.  For if a gangster  
threatens me with a gun and orders  me to apply my t humb to open my employer’s digital cash register  (say), 
then this need not undermine my ability to think rationally and decide what to do in the given situation.   Ayer 
would say that my moral freedom is lost, but a better Humean response is to say that my opening of the cash 
register remains morally free (as long as the gangster  is not physically  forcing my thumb against the detector), 
because  it is under my voluntary control.  Both Ayer and Hume can agree that I would not be morally culpable  
for this actio n, but whereas Ayer would attribute this to a lack of moral freedom, Hume ’s response is more 
straightforward:  in that situation , complying with the order  was the right  (or at least permissible ) thing to do.   
In this way,  Hume’s account can avoid the major  difficult y for classic compatibilists such as Ayer, of 
distinguishing those “constraints” that supposedly undermine moral freedom from  the various risks, threats and 
limitations  that are just part of normal life.  B ut Hume’s very thin conception  of moral freedom  as simple 
voluntariness faces well -known difficulties as regards more complex, non -rational factors that may determine 
our choices , such as addiction, indoctrination and coercive control .  These might be addressed  in a Humean 
spirit by appeal to higher -order desires  (as in Frankfurt, 1971) , but a fully adequate theory would  probably ha ve 
to move beyond the relatively crude “Humean” model of desire -driven behaviour , and take more account of the 
messy realities of hu man psychology, in the study of which Hume himself was such a pioneer.16 
 
14 This, again, implies nothing about the causation of my volition  or my character , so Hum e is not forced into any regress about 
whether we have responsibility for either of these.  Indeed, he insists that the virtues and vices for which we may be morall y 
appraised include entirely involuntary natural abilities  (see T 3.3.4 and EPM Appx  4).  It is only in respect of  voluntary  actions  
that moral appraisal presupposes responsibility and hence hypothetical liberty.  
15 With one very important exception note d at E 8.35: that these sentiments  – and hence ascriptions of blame, praise, and moral 
responsi bility – are not undermined by abstract reflections on such metaphysical issues as the deterministic nature of the universe.  
16 For illuminating discussion of these sorts of complications, see Pitson (2016), pp. 389 -92. 12 
 References  
Ayer, A. J. (1954), “Freedom and Necessity”, chapter 12 of Philosophical Essays , Macmillan , pp. 271-84. 
Bayle, Pierre (1697), Historical and Critical Dictionary: Selections , translated by Richard H. Popkin, Bobbs -
Merrill, 1965.  
Botterill, George (2002), “Hume on Liberty and Necessity”, in Peter Millican (ed.), Reading Hume on Human 
Understanding , Clarendon Press, pp. 277 -300. 
Bricke, John (2008), “Hume on Liberty a nd Necessity”, in Elizabeth S. Radcliffe (ed.), The Blackwell 
Companion to Hume , Blackwell, pp. 201 -16. 
Clarke, Samuel. (1717), Remarks upon a Book, Entituled, A Philosophical Enquiry concerning Human Liberty , 
London.  
Clarke, Samuel and Leibniz, Gottfried Wilhelm  (1717) , The Leibniz -Clarke Correspondence , ed. H. G. 
Alexander, Manchester University Press, 1977.  
Frankfurt, Harry G. (1971), “Freedom of the Will and the Concept of a Person”, The Journal of Philosophy  68, 
pp. 5-20. 
Hobbes, Thomas (1654), Of Libe rty and Necessity , London.  
Hume, David (1739 -40, 2007), A Treatise of Human Nature: A Critical Edition , eds David Fate Norton and 
Mary J. Norton. Oxford: Oxford University Press – references indicated by “ T”, and given to book, part, 
section and paragraph number.  
Hume, David (1748, 2007), An Enquiry concerning Human Understanding , ed. Peter Millican. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press – references indicated by “ EHU ”, and given to section and paragraph number.  
Hume, David (1751, 1998), An Enquiry concerning the  Principles of Morals , ed. Tom L. Beauchamp. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press – references indicated by “ EPM ”, and given to section  and paragraph number.  
Locke , John . (1690/1975) . Essay Concerning Human Understanding , ed. P. H. Nidditch . Oxford: Clarendon 
Press  – references indicated by “ Essay ”, and given to book, chapter and section number.  
Millican, Peter (2010), “Hume’s Determinism”, Canadian Journal of Philosophy  40, pp.  611-42. 
Millican, Peter (2012), Chapter 5 “Hume”, in Tom Angier (ed.), Key Thinkers: Ethics , Bloomsbury, pp. 105 -31; 
revised in second edition 2023, pp.  89-111. 
Millican, Peter (2020), “The Relation between Hume’s Two Enquiries ”, in Jacqueline Taylor (ed.), Reading 
Hume on the Principles of Morals , Oxford University Pr ess, pp.  273-99. 
Millican, Peter (2021), “Hume on Causation and Causal Powers”, in Benjamin Hill, Henrik Lagerlund, and 
Stathis Psillos (eds), Reconsidering Causal Powers: Historical and Conceptual Perspectives , Oxford 
University Press, pp.  206-40. 
Penelhu m, Terence (2000), “Hume and the Freedom of the Will”, in Penelhum, Themes in Hume: The Self, the 
Will, Religion , Clarendon Press, pp. 156 -76. 
Pitson, Tony (2016), “Hume, Free Will, and Moral Responsibility”, in Paul Russell (ed.), The Oxford Handbook 
of Hume, Oxford University Press, pp. 380 -400. 
Ramsay, Andrew  Michael  [Chevalier] (1751), The Philosophical Principles of Natural and Revealed Religion  
(second edition),  London.  
Russell, Paul (1995), Freedom and Moral Sentiment: Hume’s Way of Naturalizing Responsibility , Oxford 
University Press.  
Voltaire [François -Marie Arouet] (1764), The Newtonian Philosophy compared with that of Leibnitz, translated 
from the French of M. de Voltaire , Glasgow.  
Watts, Issac (1732), An Essay on the Freedom of W ill in God and in Creatures , London (originally published 
anonymously, but included in volume 6 of Watts’ Works , 1753).  13 
 Abstract  
Hume is widely viewed as a founding father of the compatibilist tradition within British empiricism, 
understanding free will no t as freedom from causal necessity , but rather as spontaneity  – the capacity to act on 
one’s own motives. But there has been considerable controversy about both Hume’s account of “liberty and 
necessity”, and also the wider causal theory within which it is situated. This paper starts by summarising Hume’s 
objectivist view of causation, then explains and assesses his arguments for the deterministic “doctrine of 
necessity”, as set out in his Treatise of Human Nature  of 1739 and his Enquiry Concerning Human 
Understanding  of 1748. More interpretative difficulties arise in respect of Hume’s view of “liberty” or free will, 
partly owing to terminological inconsistencies between the two works, and the paper shows how these can be 
resolved, if we understand Hume’s pos ition as differing quite significantly from that of later thinkers in the 
compatibilist tradition (such as Ayer). The paper ends by explaining how moral responsibility fits into this 
picture, making sense of ascriptions of virtue or vice according to the q ualities of mind that are revealed by an 
agent’s behaviour, and the moral sentiments they provoke.  